

Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky ( 11 November [ O.S. 30 October ] 1821 – 9 February [ O.S. 28 January ] 1881 ) was a Russian philosopher, novelist, short-story writer, essayist and journalist. He is regarded as one of the greatest novelists in both Russian and world literature, and many of his works are considered highly influential masterpieces. Dostoevsky's literary works explore the human condition in the troubled political, social and spiritual atmospheres of 19th-century Russia, and engage with a variety of philosophical and religious themes. His most acclaimed novels include Crime and Punishment (1866), The Idiot (1869), Demons (1872), The Adolescent (1875) and The Brothers Karamazov (1880). His Notes from Underground , a novella published in 1864, is considered one of the first works of existentialist literature.

Born in Moscow in 1821, Dostoevsky was introduced to literature at an early age through fairy tales and legends and through books by Russian and foreign authors. His mother died in 1837, and around the same time, he left school to enter the Nikolayevsky Engineering Academy . After graduating, he worked as an engineer and briefly enjoyed a lavish lifestyle, translating books to earn extra money. In the mid-1840s, he wrote his first novel, Poor Folk , which gained him entry into Saint Petersburg 's literary circles. However, he was arrested in 1849 for belonging to a literary group, the Petrashevsky Circle , that discussed banned books critical of Tsarist Russia . Dostoevsky was sentenced to death, but the sentence was commuted at the last moment. He spent four years in a Siberian hard labour camp, which inspired him to write The House of the Dead (1860–1862). Aside from the labour camp, there also followed six years of compulsory military service in exile. In the following years, Dostoevsky worked as a journalist, publishing and editing several magazines of his own and later A Writer's Diary , a collection of his writings. He began to travel around Western Europe and developed a gambling addiction, which led to financial hardship. For a time, he had to beg for money, but he eventually became one of the most widely read and highly regarded Russian writers.

Dostoevsky's body of work consists of thirteen novels, three novellas, seventeen short stories, and numerous other works. His writings were widely read both within and beyond his native Russia, influencing an equally great number of later writers, including Russians such as Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and Anton Chekhov , the philosophers Albert Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre , and the emergence of existentialism and Freudianism . Friedrich Nietzsche called him "the only psychologist from whom I had something to learn" in Twilight of the Idols , one of his final works before suffering a mental collapse. [ failed verification ] His books have been translated into over 170 languages.

Dostoevsky's paternal ancestors were part of a Russian noble family of Russian Orthodox Christians. The family traced its roots back to Aslan Chelebi-Murza, who defected from the Golden Horde and joined the Russian side in 1389, eventually converting to Christianity from Islam. A few centuries later, another ancestor of Dostoyevsky, Danilo Irtishch, was granted lands in the Pinsk region (for centuries part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , now in Belarus ) in 1509 for his services under a local prince, his progeny then taking the name "Dostoevsky" based on a village there called Dostojewo [ pl ] (derived from Old Polish dostojnik – dignitary).

Dostoevsky's immediate ancestors on his mother's side were merchants; the male line on his father's side were priests.

In 1809, the 20-year-old Mikhail Dostoevsky enrolled in Moscow's Imperial Medical-Surgical Academy. From there, he was assigned to a Moscow hospital, where he served as a military doctor, and in 1818, he was appointed a senior physician. In 1819, he married Maria Nechayeva. The following year, he took up a post at the Mariinsky Hospital for the poor. In 1828, when his two sons, Mikhail and Fyodor, were eight and seven, respectively, he was promoted to collegiate assessor , a position which raised his legal status to that of the nobility and enabled him to acquire a small estate in Darovoye, a town about 150 km from Moscow, where the family usually spent the summers. Dostoevsky's parents subsequently had seven more children: Varvara (1822–1893) – married a civil servant and lived a quiet life, Andrei (1825–1897) – memoirist and wrote about family history, Lyubov (born and died 1829), Vera (1829–1896) – married a doctor and maintained family ties, Nikolai (1831–1883) – struggled with alcoholism and had a troubled life, Aleksandra (1835–1889) – married a military officer and lived privately and Yelizaveta (born and died 1837).

Fyodor Dostoevsky, born on 11 November [ O.S. 30 October ] 1821 in Moscow, was the second child of Dr Mikhail Dostoevsky and Maria Dostoevskaya ( née Nechayeva). He was raised in the family home in the grounds of the Mariinsky Hospital for the Poor, which was in a lower class district on the edges of Moscow. Dostoevsky encountered the patients, who were at the lower end of the Russian social scale, when playing in the hospital gardens.

Dostoevsky was introduced to literature at an early age. From the age of three, he was read heroic sagas, fairy tales and legends by his nanny, Alena Frolovna, an especially influential figure in his upbringing and his love for fictional stories. When he was four, his mother used the Bible to teach him to read and write. His parents introduced him to a wide range of literature, including the Russian writers Nikolai Karamzin , Alexander Pushkin and Gavrila Derzhavin ; Gothic fiction such as the works from the English novelist Ann Radcliffe ; romantic works by Friedrich Schiller and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe ; heroic tales by Miguel de Cervantes and Walter Scott ; and Homer 's epics , the Iliad and the Odyssey . Dostoevsky was greatly influenced by the work of Nikolai Gogol . Although his father's approach to education has been described as strict and harsh, Dostoevsky himself reported that his imagination was brought alive by nightly readings by his parents.

Some of his childhood experiences found their way into his writings. When a nine-year-old girl had been raped by a drunk, he was asked to fetch his father to attend to her. The incident haunted him, and the theme of the desire of a mature man for a young girl appears in The Devils , The Brothers Karamazov , Crime and Punishment , and other writings. An incident involving a family servant, or serf , in the estate in Darovoye, is described in " The Peasant Marey ": when the young Dostoevsky imagines hearing a wolf in the forest, Marey, who is working nearby, comforts him.

Another memory that Dostoyevsky referred to in his prose was summer trips to his father's estate in the Kashirsky District of the Tula Governorate , which was purchased between 1831 and 1833.

Although Dostoevsky had a delicate physical constitution, his parents described him as hot-headed, stubborn, and cheeky. In 1833, Dostoevsky's father, who was profoundly religious, sent him to a French boarding school and then to the Chermak boarding school. He was described as a pale, introverted dreamer and an over-excitable romantic. To pay the school fees, his father borrowed money and extended his private medical practice. Dostoevsky felt out of place among his aristocratic classmates at the Moscow school, and the experience was later reflected in some of his works, notably The Adolescent .

On 27 February 1837, Dostoevsky's mother died of tuberculosis. The previous May, Dostoevsky's parents sent him and his elder brother Mikhail (the two eldest Dostoevsky children) to Saint Petersburg to attend the Nikolayev Military Engineering Institute (later renamed the Military Engineering-Technical University) , forcing the brothers to abandon their academic studies for military careers. Dostoevsky entered the academy in January 1838, but only with the help of family members. Mikhail was refused admission on health grounds and was sent to an academy in Reval (now Tallinn , Estonia).

Dostoevsky disliked the academy, primarily because of his lack of interest in science, mathematics, and military engineering and his preference for drawing and architecture. As his friend Konstantin Trutovsky once said, "There was no student in the entire institution with less of a military bearing than F.M. Dostoevsky. He moved clumsily and jerkily; his uniform hung awkwardly on him; and his knapsack, shako and rifle all looked like some sort of fetter he had been forced to wear for a time and which lay heavily on him." Dostoevsky's character and interests made him an outsider among his 120 classmates: he showed bravery and a strong sense of justice, protected newcomers, aligned himself with teachers, criticised corruption among officers, and helped poor farmers. Although he was solitary and inhabited his own literary world, he was respected by his classmates. His reclusiveness and interest in religion earned him the nickname "Monk Photius".

Signs of Dostoevsky's epilepsy may have first appeared at 17 years old on learning of the death of his father on 16 June 1839, although the reports of a seizure originated from accounts written by his daughter (later expanded by Sigmund Freud ) which are now considered to be unreliable. His father's official cause of death was an apoplectic stroke, but a neighbour, Pavel Khotiaintsev, accused the father's serfs of murder. Had the serfs been found guilty and sent to Siberia, Khotiaintsev would have been in a position to buy the vacated land. The serfs were acquitted in a trial in Tula , but Dostoevsky's brother Mikhail perpetuated the story. After his father's death, Dostoevsky continued his studies, passed his exams and obtained the rank of engineer cadet, entitling him to live away from the academy. He visited Mikhail in Reval (Tallinn) and frequently attended concerts, operas, plays and ballets. During this time, two of his friends introduced him to gambling.

On 12 August 1843, Dostoevsky took a job as a lieutenant engineer and lived with Adolph Totleben in an apartment owned by Dr Rizenkampf, a friend of Mikhail. Rizenkampf characterised him as "no less good-natured and no less courteous than his brother, but when not in a good mood he often looked at everything through dark glasses, became vexed, forgot good manners, and sometimes was carried away to the point of abusiveness and loss of self-awareness". Dostoevsky's first completed literary work, a translation of Honoré de Balzac 's novel Eugénie Grandet , was published in June and July 1843 in the 6th and 7th volumes of the journal Repertoire and Pantheon , followed by several other translations. None were successful and his financial difficulties led him to write a novel.

Dostoevsky completed his first novel, Poor Folk , in May 1845. His friend Dmitry Grigorovich , with whom he was sharing an apartment at the time, took the manuscript to the poet Nikolay Nekrasov , who in turn showed it to the influential literary critic Vissarion Belinsky . Belinsky described it as Russia's first " social novel ". Poor Folk was released on 15 January 1846 in the St Petersburg Collection almanac and became a commercial success.

Dostoevsky felt that his military career would endanger his now flourishing literary career, so he wrote a letter asking to resign his post. Shortly thereafter, he wrote his second novel, The Double , which appeared in the journal Notes of the Fatherland on 30 January 1846, before being published in February. Around the same time, Dostoevsky discovered socialism through the writings of the French thinkers Charles Fourier , Étienne Cabet , Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and Henri de Saint-Simon . Through his relationship with Belinsky, he expanded his knowledge of the philosophy of socialism. However, his Russian Orthodox faith and religious sensibilities could not accord with Belinsky's admixture of atheism , utilitarianism and scientific materialism , leading to increasing friction between them. Dostoevsky eventually parted with him and his associates.

After The Double received negative reviews (including a particularly scathing one from Belinsky), Dostoevsky's health declined and his seizures became more frequent, but he continued writing. From 1846 to 1848, he published several short stories in the magazine Notes of the Fatherland , including " Mr. Prokharchin ", " The Landlady ", "A Weak Heart", and " White Nights ". The negative reception of these stories, combined with his health problems and Belinsky's attacks, caused him distress and financial difficulty, but these were greatly alleviated when he joined the utopian socialist Beketov circle, a tightly knit community that helped him to survive. When the circle dissolved, Dostoevsky befriended Apollon Maykov and his brother Valerian . In 1846, on the recommendation of the poet Aleksey Pleshcheyev , he joined the Petrashevsky Circle , founded by Mikhail Petrashevsky , who had proposed social reforms in Russia. Mikhail Bakunin once wrote to Alexander Herzen that the group was "the most innocent and harmless company" and its members were "systematic opponents of all revolutionary goals and means". Dostoevsky used the circle's library on Saturdays and Sundays and occasionally participated in their discussions on freedom from censorship and the abolition of serfdom . Bakunin's description, however, was not true of the aristocrat Nikolay Speshnev , who joined the circle in 1848 and set about creating a secret revolutionary society from among its members. Dostoevsky himself became a member of this society, was aware of its aims, and actively participated, although he harboured significant doubts about their actions and intentions.

In 1849, the first parts of Netochka Nezvanova , a novel Dostoevsky had been planning since 1846, were published in Notes of the Fatherland , but his banishment ended the project, leaving only what was supposed to be the prologue of the novel. Dostoevsky never attempted to complete it, leaving only a sketch of the novel behind.

The members of the Petrashevsky Circle were denounced to an official at the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ivan Liprandi . Dostoevsky was accused of reading works by Belinsky, including the banned Letter to Gogol , and of circulating copies of these and other works. Antonelli, the government agent who had reported the group, wrote in his statement that at least one of the papers criticised Russian politics and religion. Dostoevsky responded to these charges by declaring that he had read the essays only "as a literary monument, neither more nor less"; he spoke of "personality and human egoism" rather than of politics. Even so, he and his fellow "conspirators" were arrested on 23 April 1849 at the request of Count Alexey Fyodorovich Orlov and Tsar Nicholas I , who feared a revolution like the Decembrist revolt of 1825 in Russia and the Revolutions of 1848 in Europe. The members were held in the well-defended Peter and Paul Fortress , which housed the most dangerous convicts.

The case was discussed for four months by an investigative commission headed by the Tsar, with Adjutant General Ivan Nabokov , senator Prince Pavel Gagarin , Prince Vasili Dolgorukov , General Yakov Rostovtsev and General Leonty Dubelt, head of the secret police. They sentenced the members of the circle to death by firing squad, and the prisoners were taken to Semyonov Place in Saint Petersburg on 23 December 1849. They were split into three-man groups and the first group was taken in front of the firing squad. Dostoevsky was the third in the second row; next to him stood Pleshcheyev and Durov . The execution was stayed when a cart delivered a letter from the tsar commuting the sentence. Dostoevsky later described the experience of what he believed to be the last moments of his life in his novel The Idiot ; the main character, Prince Myshkin, tells the story of a young man sentenced to death by firing squad but reprieved at the last moment. Prince Myshkin describes the experience from the point of view of the victim and considers the philosophical and spiritual implications.

Dostoevsky served four years of exile with hard labour at a katorga prison camp in Omsk , Siberia, followed by a term of compulsory military service. After a fourteen-day sleigh ride , the prisoners reached Tobolsk , a prisoner way station. Despite the circumstances, Dostoevsky consoled the other prisoners, such as the Petrashevist Ivan Yastrzhembsky, who was surprised by Dostoevsky's kindness and eventually abandoned his decision to kill himself. In Tobolsk, they received food and clothes from the Decembrist women, as well as several copies of the New Testament with a ten-rouble banknote inside each copy. Eleven days later, Dostoevsky reached Omsk together with just one other member of the Petrashevsky Circle, the writer Sergei Durov. Dostoevsky described his barracks:

In summer, intolerable closeness; in winter, unendurable cold. All the floors were rotten. Filth on the floors an inch thick; one could slip and fall [...] We were packed like herrings in a barrel [...] There was no room to turn around. From dusk to dawn, it was impossible not to behave like pigs [...] Fleas, lice, and black beetles by the bushel [...] [ missing long citation ]

Classified as "one of the most dangerous convicts", Dostoevsky had his hands and feet shackled until his release. He was only permitted to read his copy of the New Testament. In addition to his seizures, he had hemorrhoids, lost weight and was "burned by some fever, trembling and feeling too hot or too cold every night". The smell of the privy pervaded the entire building, and the small bathroom had to suffice for more than 200 people. Dostoevsky was occasionally sent to the military hospital, where he read newspapers and Charles Dickens novels. He was respected by most of the other prisoners, but despised by some Polish political prisoners because of his Russian nationalism and anti-Polish sentiments.

After his release on 14 February 1854, Dostoevsky asked Mikhail to help him financially and to send him books by Giambattista Vico , François Guizot , Leopold von Ranke , Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Immanuel Kant . The House of the Dead , based on his experience in prison, was published in 1861 in the journal Vremya ("Time") – it was the first published novel about Russian prisons. Before moving in mid-March to Semipalatinsk , where he was forced to serve in the Siberian Army Corps of the Seventh Line Battalion, Dostoevsky met the geographer Pyotr Semyonov and the ethnographer Shoqan Walikhanov . Around November 1854, he met Baron Alexander Egorovich Wrangel , an admirer of his books, who had attended the aborted execution. They both rented houses in the Cossack Garden outside Semipalatinsk. Wrangel remarked that Dostoevsky "looked morose. His sickly, pale face was covered with freckles, and his blond hair was cut short. He was a little over average height and looked at me intensely with his sharp, grey-blue eyes. It was as if he were trying to look into my soul and discover what kind of man I was."

In Semipalatinsk, Dostoevsky tutored several schoolchildren and came into contact with upper-class families, including that of Lieutenant-Colonel Belikhov, who used to invite him to read passages from newspapers and magazines. During a visit to Belikhov, Dostoevsky met Maria Dmitrievna Isaeva and fell in love with her; Isaeva and her son later moved with Dostoevsky to Barnaul . In 1856, Dostoevsky sent a letter through Wrangel to General Eduard Totleben , apologising for his activity in several utopian circles. As a result, he obtained the right to publish books and to marry, although he remained under police surveillance for the rest of his life. Isaeva and Dostoevsky married in Kuznetsk on 7 February 1857, even though she had initially refused his marriage proposal, stating that they were not meant for each other and that his poor financial situation precluded marriage. Their family life was unhappy and she found it difficult to cope with his seizures. Describing their relationship, he wrote: "Because of her strange, suspicious and fantastic character, we were definitely not happy together, but we could not stop loving each other; and the more unhappy we were, the more attached to each other we became". They mostly lived apart. In 1859 he was released from military service because of deteriorating health and was granted permission to return to European Russia, first to Tver , where he met his brother for the first time in ten years, and then to Saint Petersburg.

The short story "A Little Hero" (Dostoevsky's only work completed in prison) appeared in a journal, but "Uncle's Dream" and "The Village of Stepanchikovo" were not published until 1860. Notes from the House of the Dead was released in Russky Mir (Russian World) in September 1860. Humiliated and Insulted was published in the new Vremya magazine, which had been created with the help of funds from his brother's cigarette factory.

Dostoevsky travelled to Western Europe for the first time on 7 June 1862, visiting Cologne, Berlin, Dresden, Wiesbaden, Belgium and Paris. In London, he met Alexander Herzen and visited the Crystal Palace . He travelled with Nikolay Strakhov through Switzerland and several North Italian cities, including Turin, Livorno, and the central Italian city of Florence. He recorded his impressions of those trips in the essay " Winter Notes on Summer Impressions ", in which he also criticised capitalism, social modernisation, materialism , Catholicism and Protestantism. Dostoevsky viewed the Crystal Palace as a monument to soulless modern society, the myth of progress, and the worship of empty materialism.

From August to October 1863, Dostoevsky made another trip to Western Europe. He met his second love, Polina Suslova , in Paris and lost nearly all his money gambling in Wiesbaden and Baden-Baden. In 1864, his wife Maria and his brother Mikhail died; Dostoevsky then became the lone parent of his stepson Pasha and the sole supporter of his brother's family. The failure of Epoch , the magazine he had founded with Mikhail after the suppression of Vremya , worsened his financial situation, although the continued help of his relatives and friends averted bankruptcy.

The first two parts of Crime and Punishment were published in January and February 1866 in the periodical The Russian Messenger , attracting at least 500 new subscribers to the magazine.

Dostoevsky returned to Saint Petersburg in mid-September and promised his editor, Fyodor Stellovsky , that he would complete a novel titled The Gambler by November, although he had not yet begun writing it. One of Dostoevsky's friends, Aleksandr Milyukov , advised him to hire a secretary. Dostoevsky contacted stenographer Pavel Olkhin from Saint Petersburg, who recommended his pupil, the twenty-year-old Anna Grigoryevna Snitkina . Her shorthand helped Dostoevsky to complete The Gambler on 30 October, after 26 days' work. She remarked that Dostoevsky was of average height but always tried to carry himself erect. "He had light brown, slightly reddish hair; he used some hair conditioner, and he combed his hair in a diligent way [...] his eyes, they were different: one was dark brown; in the other, the pupil was so big that you could not see its colour, [this was caused by an injury]. The strangeness of his eyes gave Dostoyevsky a mysterious appearance. His face was pale, and it looked unhealthy."

On 15 February 1867, Dostoevsky and Snitkina married in Trinity Cathedral, Saint Petersburg . On 14 April 1867, they began a delayed honeymoon in Germany; the 7,000 rubles he had earned from Crime and Punishment did not cover their debts, forcing Anna to sell her valuables to finance their trip. They stayed in Berlin, visited the Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister in Dresden , where he sought inspiration for his writing, and also stopped in Frankfurt , Darmstadt , Heidelberg and Karlsruhe . They spent five weeks in Baden-Baden , where Dostoevsky had a quarrel with Ivan Turgenev and again lost much money at the roulette table. At one point, his wife was reportedly forced to pawn her underwear.

In September 1867, Dostoevsky began work on The Idiot , and after a prolonged planning process that bore little resemblance to the published novel, he eventually managed to write the first 100 pages in only 23 days; the serialisation began in The Russian Messenger in January 1868.

By 1868, the couple had moved on to Geneva . Their first child, Sofya, had been conceived in Baden-Baden and was born in Geneva on 5 March 1868. The baby died of pneumonia three months later, and Anna recalled how Dostoevsky "wept and sobbed like a woman in despair". Sofya was buried at the Cimetière des Rois in Geneva; her grave was later dissolved, but in 1986 the International Dostoevsky Society donated a commemorative plaque in her honour.

After Sofya's death, the couple continued their travels through Europe. They first went to Vevey and then Milan before continuing to Florence , where Dostoevsky completed The Idiot in January 1869; its final part appeared in The Russian Messenger in the following month. Later that year, in Dresden, Anna gave birth to their second daughter, Lyubov , on 26 September. After hearing news that the socialist revolutionary group "People's Vengeance" had murdered one of its own members, Ivan Ivanov, on 21 November 1869, Dostoevsky began writing Demons .

In April 1871, Dostoevsky made a final visit to a gambling hall in Wiesbaden. Anna claimed that he stopped gambling after the birth of their second daughter, but this is a subject of debate. During a train trip to Berlin, he burnt several manuscripts, including those of The Idiot , because he was concerned about potential problems with customs. The Dostoevsky family finally arrived back in Saint Petersburg on 8 July, marking the end of a honeymoon (originally planned for three months) that had lasted over four years.

Back in Russia in July 1871, the family was again in financial trouble and had to sell their remaining possessions. Their son Fyodor was born on 16 July, and they moved to an apartment near the Institute of Technology soon after. They hoped to cancel their large debts by selling their rental house in Peski, but difficulties with the tenant resulted in a relatively low selling price, and disputes with their creditors continued. Anna proposed that they raise money on her husband's copyrights and negotiate with the creditors to pay off their debts in installments.

Dostoevsky revived his friendships with Maykov and Strakhov and made new acquaintances, including church politician Terty Filipov and the brothers Vsevolod and Vladimir Solovyov . Konstantin Pobedonostsev , future Imperial High Commissioner of the Most Holy Synod , influenced Dostoevsky's political progression to conservatism. [ citation needed ]

Around early 1872, the family spent several months in Staraya Russa , a town known for its mineral spa . Dostoevsky's work was delayed when Anna's sister Maria Svatkovskaya died on 1 May 1872, from either typhus or malaria , and Anna developed an abscess on her throat.

The family returned to Saint Petersburg in September. Demons was finished on 26 November 1872 and released in the following January by the "Dostoevsky Publishing Company", which the Dostoevskys had just established. Anna managed the company's finances, sold the book out of their apartment and only accepted cash payments; but Demons was a success, selling around 3,000 copies. Dostoevsky proposed that they establish a new periodical called A Writer's Diary , to include a collection of essays, but funds were lacking. The Diary was instead published in Vladimir Meshchersky 's magazine The Citizen , beginning on 1 January 1873, in return for a salary of 3,000 rubles per year. That summer, Anna returned to Staraya Russa with the children, while Dostoevsky stayed in Saint Petersburg to continue with his Diary .

In March 1874, Dostoevsky left The Citizen because of the stressful work and interference from the Russian bureaucracy. In his fifteen months with The Citizen , he had been taken to court twice: on 11 June 1873 for citing the words of Prince Meshchersky without permission, and again on 23 March 1874. Dostoevsky offered to sell a new novel he had not yet begun to write to The Russian Messenger , but the magazine refused. Nikolay Nekrasov then suggested that he publish in another periodical, Notes of the Fatherland , which offered Dostoevsky 250 rubles for each printer's sheet – 100 more than he would have earned with The Russian Messenger . Dostoevsky accepted. [ citation needed ]

That year, his health began to decline. Dostoevsky consulted several doctors in Saint Petersburg and was advised to take a cure outside Russia. In July, he travelled to Bad Ems , where a physician diagnosed him with acute catarrh . During his stay there, he began writing The Adolescent , and he returned to Saint Petersburg in late July. Anna proposed that they spend the winter in Staraya Russa to allow Dostoevsky to rest, although doctors had suggested a second visit to Ems because his health had previously improved there.

On 10 August 1875, his son Alexey was born in Staraya Russa, and in mid-September the family returned to Saint Petersburg. Dostoevsky finished The Adolescent at the end of 1875, although passages of it had been serialised in Notes of the Fatherland since January. The Adolescent chronicles the life of Arkady Dolgoruky, the illegitimate child of the landowner Versilov and a peasant mother. It deals primarily with the relationship between father and son, which became a frequent theme in Dostoevsky's subsequent works.

In early 1876, Dostoevsky continued work on his Diary , compiling pieces from the periodical into a book. The book, titled A Writer's Diary , is a collection of numerous essays and a few short stories about society, religion, politics and ethics, and it sold more than twice as many copies as his previous books. Dostoevsky began to receive more letters from readers than ever before, and people of all ages and occupations visited him. With assistance from Anna's brother, the family bought a dacha in Staraya Russa. In the summer of 1876, Dostoevsky began experiencing shortness of breath again. He visited Ems for the third time and was told that he might live for another 15 years if he moved to a healthier climate. Upon returning to Russia, Tsar Alexander II ordered Dostoevsky to visit his palace to present the Diary to him, and he asked him to educate his sons, Sergey and Paul . This visit further increased Dostoevsky's circle of acquaintances. He was a frequent guest in several salons in Saint Petersburg and met many famous people, including Countess Sophia Tolstaya , Yakov Polonsky , Sergei Witte , Alexey Suvorin , Anton Rubinstein and Ilya Repin .

Dostoevsky's health declined further, and in March 1877, he had four epileptic seizures. Rather than returning to Ems, he visited Maly Prikol, a manor near Kursk . While returning to St Petersburg to finalise his Diary , he visited Darovoye, where he had spent much of his childhood. In December, he attended Nekrasov's funeral and gave a speech. He was appointed an honorary member of the Russian Academy of Sciences , from which he received an honorary certificate in February 1879. He declined an invitation to an international congress on copyright in Paris after his son Alyosha had a severe epileptic seizure and died on 16 May.

The family later moved to the apartment where Dostoevsky had written his first works. Around this time, he was elected to the board of directors of the Slavic Benevolent Society in Saint Petersburg, and that summer he was elected to the honorary committee of the Association Littéraire et Artistique Internationale , whose members included Victor Hugo , Ivan Turgenev , Paul Heyse , Alfred Tennyson , Anthony Trollope , Henry Longfellow , Ralph Waldo Emerson and Leo Tolstoy .

Dostoevsky made his fourth and final visit to Ems in early August 1879. He was diagnosed with early-stage pulmonary emphysema , which his doctor believed could be successfully managed, but not cured.

On 3 February 1880, Dostoevsky was elected vice-president of the Slavic Benevolent Society and was invited to speak at the unveiling of the Pushkin memorial in Moscow. On 8 June, he delivered his speech , giving an impressive performance that had a significant emotional impact on his audience. His speech was met with thunderous applause, and even his long-time rival Turgenev embraced him. Konstantin Staniukovich praised the speech in his essay "The Pushkin Anniversary and Dostoevsky's Speech" in The Business , writing that "the language of Dostoevsky's [Pushkin Speech] really looks like a sermon. He speaks with the tone of a prophet. He makes a sermon like a pastor; it is very deep, sincere, and we understand that he wants to impress the emotions of his listeners." The speech was criticised by liberal political scientist Aleksandr Gradovsky , who thought that Dostoevsky idolised "the people", and by the conservative thinker Konstantin Leontiev , who, in his essay "On Universal Love", compared the speech to French utopian socialism. The attacks led to a further deterioration in his health.

On 6 February [ O.S. 25 January ] 1881 , while searching for members of the terrorist organisation Narodnaya Volya ("The People's Will") who would soon assassinate Tsar Alexander II , the Tsar's secret police executed a search warrant in the apartment of Alexander Barannikov , one of Dostoevsky's neighbors. [ page needed ] On the following day, Dostoevsky suffered a pulmonary hemorrhage . Anna denied that the search had caused it, saying that the hemorrhage had occurred after her husband had been looking for a dropped pen-holder. After he suffered another hemorrhage, Anna called the doctors, who gave a poor prognosis. A third hemorrhage followed shortly afterwards. While seeing his children before dying, Dostoevsky requested the parable of the Prodigal Son to be read to his children. The profound meaning of this request is pointed out by Joseph Frank :

It was this parable of transgression, repentance, and forgiveness that he wished to leave as a last heritage to his children, and it may well be seen as his own ultimate understanding of the meaning of his life and the message of his work.

He died on 9 February [ O.S. 28 January ] . Among Dostoevsky's last words was his quotation of Matthew 3 : 14–15 : "But John forbade him, saying, I have a need to be baptised of thee, and comest thou to me? And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness", and he finished with "Hear now — permit it. Do not restrain me!" His last words to his wife Anna were: "Remember, Anya, I have always loved you passionately and have never been unfaithful to you ever, even in my thoughts!" When he died, his body was placed on a table, following Russian custom.

Dostoevsky was interred in the Tikhvin Cemetery at the Alexander Nevsky Convent , near his favourite poets, Nikolay Karamzin and Vasily Zhukovsky . It is unclear how many attended his funeral. According to one reporter, more than 100,000 mourners were present, while others describe attendance between 40,000 and 50,000. His tombstone is inscribed with lines from the New Testament:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it dies, it bringeth forth much fruit.

— John 12 : 24

Dostoevsky was romantically involved with several women before his second marriage to Anna Snitkina in 1867. He had his first known affair with Avdotya Panaeva , whom he met in Ivan Panaev 's circle in the early 1840s. He described her as educated, interested in literature, and a femme fatale . He admitted later that he was uncertain about their relationship. According to Anna Dostoevskaya's memoirs, Dostoevsky once asked his sister's sister-in-law, Yelena Ivanova, whether she would marry him, hoping to replace her mortally ill husband after he died, but she rejected his proposal.

Dostoevsky and Polina Suslova had a short but intimate affair, which peaked in the winter of 1862–1863. Suslova's dalliance with a Spaniard in late spring and Dostoevsky's gambling addiction and age ended their relationship. He later described her in a letter to Nadezhda Suslova as a "great egoist. Her egoism and her vanity are colossal. She demands everything of other people, all the perfections, and does not pardon the slightest imperfection in the light of other qualities that one may possess", and later stated, "I still love her, but I do not want to love her any more. She doesn't deserve this love [...]"

In 1858, Dostoevsky had a romance with comic actress Aleksandra Ivanovna Schubert. Although she divorced Dostoevsky's friend Stepan Yanovsky , she would not live with him. Dostoevsky did not love her either, but they were probably good friends. She wrote that he "became very attracted to me".

Through a worker in Epoch , Dostoevsky learned of the Russian-born Martha Brown (née Elizaveta Andreyevna Chlebnikova), who had had affairs with several Westerners. Her relationship with Dostoevsky is known only through letters written between November 1864 and January 1865.

In 1865, Dostoevsky met Anna Korvin-Krukovskaya . Their relationship is not verified; Anna Dostoevskaya spoke of a good affair, but Korvin-Krukovskaya's sister, the mathematician Sofia Kovalevskaya , thought that Korvin-Krukovskaya had rejected him.

In his youth, Dostoevsky enjoyed reading Nikolai Karamzin 's History of the Russian State (published 1818–1829), which praised conservatism and Russian independence, ideas that Dostoevsky would embrace later in life. Before his arrest for participating in the Petrashevsky Circle in 1849, Dostoevsky remarked, "As far as I am concerned, nothing was ever more ridiculous than the idea of a republican government in Russia." In an 1881 edition of his Diaries , Dostoevsky stated that the Tsar and the people should form a unity: "For the people, the tsar is not an external power, not the power of some conqueror [...] but a power of all the people, an all-unifying power the people themselves desired."

While critical of serfdom, Dostoevsky was sceptical about the creation of a constitution , a concept he viewed as unrelated to Russia's history. He described it as a mere "gentleman's rule" and believed that "a constitution would simply enslave the people". [ citation needed ] He advocated social change instead, for example, the removal of the feudal system and a weakening of the divisions between the peasantry and the affluent classes. His ideal was a utopian, Christianised Russia where "if everyone were actively Christian, not a single social question would come up [...] If they were Christians, they would settle everything". He thought democracy and oligarchy were poor systems; of France he wrote, "the oligarchs are only concerned with the interest of the wealthy; the democrats, only with the interest of the poor; but the interests of society, the interest of all and the future of France as a whole — no one there bothers about these things." He maintained that political parties ultimately led to social discord. In the 1860s, he discovered Pochvennichestvo , a movement similar to Slavophilism in that it rejected Europe's culture and contemporary philosophical movements, such as nihilism and materialism. Pochvennichestvo differed from Slavophilism in aiming to establish, not an isolated Russia, but a more open state modelled on the Russia of Peter the Great .

In his incomplete article "Socialism and Christianity", Dostoevsky claimed that civilisation ("the second stage in human history") had become degraded, and that it was moving towards liberalism and losing its faith in God. He asserted that the traditional concept of Christianity should be recovered. He thought that contemporary Western Europe had "rejected the single formula for their salvation that came from God and was proclaimed through revelation, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself", and replaced it with practical conclusions such as, Chacun pour soi et Dieu pour tous [Every man for himself and God for all], or "scientific" slogans like the struggle for survival ". He considered this crisis to be the consequence of the collision between communal and individual interests, brought about by a decline in religious and moral principles.

Dostoevsky distinguished three "enormous world ideas" prevalent in his time: Roman Catholicism , Protestantism and (Russian) Orthodoxy . He claimed that Catholicism had continued the tradition of Imperial Rome and had thus become anti-Christian and proto-socialist, inasmuch as the Church's interest in political and mundane affairs led it to abandon the idea of Christ. For Dostoevsky, socialism was "the latest incarnation of the Catholic idea" and its "natural ally". He found Protestantism self-contradictory and claimed that it would ultimately lose power and spirituality. He deemed (Russian) Orthodoxy to be the ideal form of Christianity. [ citation needed ]

For all that, to place Dostoevsky politically is not simple: as a Christian, he rejected atheistic socialism; as a traditionalist, he rejected the destruction of the institutions; and, as a pacifist, he rejected any violent method or upheaval led by either progressives or reactionaries. He supported private property and business rights and did not agree with many criticisms of the free market from the socialist utopians of his time. [ need quotation to verify ]

During the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–1878, Dostoevsky asserted that war might be necessary if salvation were to be granted. He wanted the Muslim Ottoman Empire eliminated and the Christian Byzantine Empire restored, and he hoped for the liberation of Balkan Slavs and their unification with the Russian Empire. Under the ideology of pochvennichestvo , he advocated for a Slavic federation to be led by Russia; the federation, excluding Slavs, would also include Hungarians , Romanians and Greeks "whose historical destinies have attached them by indestructible bonds to the Slav world". This federation would include Constantinople and the Dardanelles Straits , which would be taken away from the Ottoman Empire .

Historian Richard Pipes placed Dostoevsky as being firmly in the tradition of Russian Conservatism , describing Crime and Punishment , The Brothers Karamazov , and Demons as political novels. Pipes was critical of Dostoevsky's politics, saying that in the ordinary sense, the author "knew little and understood less" and his political analysis went little beyond xenophobia and "crude" jingoism. Instead, it was in Dostoevsky's understanding of the "psychological implications of radicalism" that his greatness lay.

Many characters in Dostoevsky's works, including Jews , have been described as displaying negative stereotypes. In an 1877 letter to Arkady Kovner, a Jew who had accused Dostoevsky of antisemitism, he replied with the following:

"I am not an enemy of the Jews at all and never have been. But as you say, its 40 century existence proves that this tribe has exceptional vitality, which would not help, during the course of its history, taking the form of various Status in Statu [...] how can they fail to find themselves, even if only partially, at variance with the indigenous population – the Russian tribe?"

Dostoevsky held to a Pan-Slavic ideology that was conditioned by the Ottoman occupations of Eastern Europe. In 1876, the Slavic populations of modern-day South-Eastern Serbia outside of the Principality of Serbia (independent since 1868) and of the region of Bulgaria rose against their Ottoman overlords, but the rebellion was put down. In the process, an estimated 12,000 people were killed. In his diaries, he scorned Westerners and those who were against the Pan-Slavic movement. This ideology was motivated in part by the desire to promote a common Orthodox Christian heritage, which he saw as both unifying and a force for liberation.

Dostoevsky was an Orthodox Christian who was raised in a religious family and knew the Gospel from a very young age. He was influenced by the Russian translation of Johannes Hübner's One Hundred and Four Sacred Stories from the Old and New Testaments Selected for Children (partly a German bible for children and partly a catechism ). He attended Sunday liturgies from an early age and took part in annual pilgrimages to the St. Sergius Trinity Monastery . A deacon at the hospital gave him religious instruction. Among his most cherished childhood memories were reciting prayers in front of guests and reading passages from the Book of Job that impressed him while "still almost a child."

According to an officer at the military academy, Dostoevsky was profoundly religious, followed Orthodox practice, and regularly read the Gospels and Heinrich Zschokke 's Die Stunden der Andacht ("Hours of Devotion"), which "preached a sentimental version of Christianity entirely free from dogmatic content and with a strong emphasis on giving Christian love a social application". This book may have prompted his later interest in Christian socialism . Through the literature of E. T. A. Hoffmann , Honoré de Balzac , Eugène Sue , and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , Dostoevsky created his own belief system, similar to Russian sectarianism and the Old Belief . After his arrest, aborted execution, and subsequent imprisonment, he focused intensely on the figure of Christ and on the New Testament, the only book allowed in prison. In a January 1854 letter to the woman who had sent him the New Testament, Dostoevsky wrote that he was a "child of unbelief and doubt up to this moment, and I am certain that I shall remain so to the grave". He also wrote that "even if someone were to prove to me that the truth lay outside Christ, I should choose to remain with Christ rather than with the truth".

In Semipalatinsk , Dostoevsky revived his faith by looking frequently at the stars. Wrangel said that he was "rather pious, but did not often go to church, and disliked priests, especially the Siberian ones. But he spoke about Christ ecstatically." Two pilgrimages and two works by Demetrius of Rostov , an archbishop who influenced Ukrainian and Russian literature by composing groundbreaking religious plays, strengthened his beliefs. Through his visits to western Europe and discussions with Herzen, Apollon Grigoryev , and Nikolay Strakhov , Dostoevsky discovered the Pochvennichestvo movement and the theory that the Catholic Church had adopted the principles of rationalism , legalism , materialism , and individualism from ancient Rome and had passed on its philosophy to Protestantism and consequently to atheistic socialism.

Dostoevsky's canon includes novels, novellas, novelettes , short stories, essays, pamphlets, limericks , epigrams and poems. He wrote more than 700 letters, a dozen of which are lost.

Dostoevsky expressed religious, psychological, and philosophical ideas in his writings. His works explore such themes as suicide, poverty, human manipulation, and morality. Psychological themes include dreaming, first seen in "White Nights", and the father-son relationship, beginning in The Adolescent . Most of his works demonstrate a vision of the chaotic sociopolitical structure of contemporary Russia. His early works viewed society (for example, the differences between poor and rich) through the lens of literary realism and naturalism . The influences of other writers, particularly evident in his early works, led to accusations of plagiarism, but his style gradually became more individual. After his release from prison, Dostoevsky incorporated religious themes, especially those of Russian Orthodoxy, into his writing. Elements of gothic fiction , romanticism , and satire are observable in some of his books. He frequently used autobiographical or semi-autobiographical details.

An important stylistic element in Dostoevsky's writing is polyphony , the simultaneous presence of multiple narrative voices and perspectives. [ page needed ] Kornelije Kvas wrote that Bakhtin's theory of "the polyphonic novel and Dostoevsky's dialogicness of narration postulates the non-existence of the "final" word, which is why the thoughts, emotions and experiences of the world of the narrator and his/her characters are reflected through the words of another, with which they can never fully blend."

Dostoevsky is regarded as one of the greatest and most influential novelists of the Golden Age of Russian literature . Leo Tolstoy admired some of Dostoevsky's works, particularly The House of the Dead , which he saw as exalted religious art, inspired by deep faith and love of humanity. Albert Einstein called Dostoevsky a "great religious writer" who explores "the mystery of spiritual existence." Sigmund Freud ranked Dostoevsky second only to William Shakespeare as a creative writer, and called The Brothers Karamazov "the most magnificent novel ever written." Friedrich Nietzsche called Dostoevsky "the only psychologist from whom I had something to learn" and described him as being "among the most beautiful strokes of fortune in my life." [ missing long citation ] The Russian literary theorist Mikhail Bakhtin 's analysis of Dostoevsky came to be at the foundation of his theory of the novel. Bakhtin argued that Dostoevsky's use of polyphony was a major advancement in the development of the novel as a genre.

In his posthumous collection of sketches A Moveable Feast , Ernest Hemingway stated that in Dostoevsky "there were things believable and not to be believed, but some so true that they changed you as you read them; frailty and madness, wickedness and saintliness, and the insanity of gambling were there to know". James Joyce praised Dostoevsky's prose: "[...] he is the man more than any other who has created modern prose, and intensified it to its present-day pitch. It was his explosive power which shattered the Victorian novel with its simpering maidens and ordered commonplaces; books which were without imagination or violence." In her essay The Russian Point of View , Virginia Woolf said, "Out of Shakespeare there is no more exciting reading". Franz Kafka called Dostoevsky his "blood-relative" and was heavily influenced by his works, particularly The Brothers Karamazov and Crime and Punishment , both of which profoundly influenced The Trial . Hermann Hesse enjoyed Dostoevsky's work and said that to read him is like a "glimpse into the havoc". The Norwegian novelist Knut Hamsun wrote that "no one has analyzed the complicated human structure as Dostoyevsky. His psychologic sense is overwhelming and visionary." Writers associated with cultural movements such as surrealism , existentialism and the Beats cite Dostoevsky as an influence, and he is regarded as a forerunner to Russian symbolism , expressionism and psychoanalysis.

J. M. Coetzee featured Dostoevsky as the protagonist in his 1997 novel The Master of Petersburg . The famous Malayalam novel Oru Sankeerthanam Pole by Perumbadavam Sreedharan deals with the life of Dostoevsky and his love affair with Anna .

In 1956, an olive-green postage stamp dedicated to Dostoevsky was released in the Soviet Union , with a print run of 1,000 copies. The Dostoevsky Museum was opened on 12 November 1971 in the apartment where he wrote his first and final novels. A crater on Mercury was named after him in 1979, and a minor planet discovered in 1981 by Lyudmila Karachkina was named 3453 Dostoevsky . Music critic and broadcaster Artemy Troitsky has hosted the radio show "FM Достоевский" (FM Dostoevsky) since 1997. Viewers of the TV show Name of Russia voted him the ninth greatest Russian of all time, just after Dmitry Mendeleev , and just ahead of ruler Ivan IV . An Eagle Award -winning TV series directed by Vladimir Khotinenko about Dostoevsky's life was screened in 2011.

Numerous memorials were inaugurated in cities and regions such as Moscow, Saint Petersburg, Novosibirsk , Omsk, Semipalatinsk, Kusnetsk, Darovoye, Staraya Russa, Lyublino , Tallinn , Dresden , Baden-Baden and Wiesbaden . The Dostoyevskaya metro station in Saint Petersburg was opened on 30 December 1991, and the station of the same name in Moscow was opened on 19 June 2010, the 75th anniversary of the Moscow Metro . The Moscow station is decorated with murals by artist Ivan Nikolaev depicting scenes from Dostoevsky's works, such as controversial suicides.

In 2021, Kazakhstan celebrated the 200th anniversary of Dostoevsky's birth.

Dostoevsky's work did not always gain a positive reception. Some critics, such as Nikolay Dobrolyubov , Ivan Bunin and Vladimir Nabokov , viewed his writing as excessively psychological and philosophical rather than artistic. Others found fault with chaotic and disorganised plots, and others, like Turgenev, objected to "excessive psychologizing" and too-detailed naturalism. His style was deemed "prolix, repetitious and lacking in polish, balance, restraint and good taste". Saltykov-Shchedrin , Nikolay Mikhaylovsky and others criticised his puppet-like characters, most prominently in The Idiot , Demons ( The Possessed , The Devils ) and The Brothers Karamazov . These characters were compared to those of Hoffmann, an author whom Dostoevsky admired.

Basing his estimation on stated criteria of enduring art and individual genius, Nabokov judges Dostoevsky "not a great writer, but rather a mediocre one — with flashes of excellent humour but, alas, with wastelands of literary platitudes in between." Nabokov complains that the novels are peopled by "neurotics and lunatics" and states that Dostoevsky's characters do not develop: "We get them all complete at the beginning of the tale and so they remain." He finds the novels full of contrived "surprises and complications of plot", which are effective when first read, but on second reading, without the shock and benefit of these surprises, appear loaded with "glorified cliché". The Scottish poet and critic Edwin Muir , however, addressed criticism regarding the quality of Dostoevsky's characters, noting that "regarding the "oddness" of Dostoevsky's characters, it has been pointed out that they perhaps only seem "pathological", whereas in reality they are "only visualised more clearly than any figures in imaginative literature".

Dostoevsky's books have been translated into more than 170 languages. The German translator Wilhelm Wolfsohn published one of the first translations, parts of Poor Folk , in an 1846–1847 magazine, and a French translation followed. French, German and Italian translations usually came directly from the original, while English translations were second-hand and of poor quality. The first English translations were by Marie von Thilo in 1881, but the first highly regarded ones were produced between 1912 and 1920 by Constance Garnett . Her flowing and easy translations helped popularise Dostoevsky's novels in anglophone countries, and Bakhtin's Problems of Dostoevsky's Creative Art (1929) (republished and revised as Problems of Dostoevsky's Poetics in 1963) provided further understanding of his style.

Dostoevsky's works have been interpreted in film and on stage in many different countries. Princess Varvara Dmitrevna Obolenskaya was among the first to propose staging Crime and Punishment . Dostoevsky did not refuse permission, but he advised against it, as he believed that "each art corresponds to a series of poetic thoughts, so that one idea cannot be expressed in another non-corresponding form". His extensive explanations in opposition to the transposition of his works into other media were groundbreaking in fidelity criticism. He thought that just one episode should be dramatised, or an idea should be taken and incorporated into a separate plot. According to critic Alexander Burry, some of the most effective adaptions are Sergei Prokofiev 's opera The Gambler , Leoš Janáček 's opera From the House of the Dead , Akira Kurosawa 's film The Idiot and Andrzej Wajda 's film The Possessed .

After the 1917 Russian Revolution , passages of Dostoevsky books were sometimes shortened, although only two books were censored: Demons and Diary of a Writer . His philosophy, particularly in Demons , was deemed anti-capitalist but also anti-communist and reactionary. According to historian Boris Ilizarov, Stalin read Dostoevsky's The Brothers Karamazov several times.

Dostoevsky's works of fiction include 16 novels and novellas, 16 short stories, and 5 translations. Many of his longer novels were first published in serialized form in literary magazines and journals. The years given below indicate the year in which the novel's final part or the first complete book edition was published. In English, many of his novels and stories are known by different titles.

Poor Folk is an epistolary novel that depicts the relationship between the small, elderly official Makar Devushkin and the young seamstress Varvara Dobroselova, remote relatives who write letters to each other. Makar's tender, sentimental adoration for Varvara and her confident, warm friendship for him explain their evident preference for a simple life, although it keeps them in humiliating poverty. An unscrupulous merchant finds the inexperienced girl and hires her as his housewife and guarantor. He sends her to a manor somewhere on a steppe, while Makar alleviates his misery and pain with alcohol.

The story focuses on poor people who struggle with their lack of self-esteem. Their misery leads to the loss of their inner freedom, to dependence on the social authorities, and to the extinction of their individuality. Dostoevsky shows how poverty and dependence are indissolubly aligned with deflection and deformation of self-esteem, combining inward and outward suffering.

Notes from Underground is split into two stylistically different parts, the first essay-like, the second in narrative style. The protagonist and first-person narrator is an unnamed 40-year-old civil servant known as The Underground Man. The only known facts about his situation are that he has quit the service, lives in a basement flat on the outskirts of Saint Petersburg and finances his livelihood from a modest inheritance.

The first part is a record of his thoughts about society and his character. He describes himself as vicious, squalid and ugly; the chief focuses of his polemic are the "modern human" and his vision of the world, which he attacks severely and cynically, and towards which he develops aggression and vengefulness. He considers his own decline natural and necessary. Although he emphasises that he does not intend to publish his notes for the public, the narrator appeals repeatedly to an ill-described audience, whose questions he tries to address.

In the second part, he describes scenes from his life that are responsible for his failure in personal and professional life and in his love life. He tells of meeting old school friends, who are in secure positions and treat him with condescension. His aggression turns inward onto himself and he tries to humiliate himself further. He presents himself as a possible saviour to the poor prostitute Liza, advising her to reject self-reproach when she looks to him for hope. Dostoevsky added a short commentary saying that although the storyline and characters are fictional, such things were inevitable in contemporary society.

The Underground Man was very influential on philosophers. His alienated existence from the mainstream influenced modernist literature .

The novel Crime and Punishment has received both critical and popular acclaim. It remains one of the most influential and widely read novels in Russian literature , and has been sometimes described as Dostoevsky's magnum opus .

Crime and Punishment follows the mental anguish and moral dilemmas of Rodion Raskolnikov , an impoverished ex-student in Saint Petersburg who plans to kill an unscrupulous pawnbroker, an old woman who stores money and valuable objects in her flat. He theorises that with the money he could liberate himself from poverty and go on to perform great deeds, and seeks to convince himself that certain crimes are justifiable if they are committed in order to remove obstacles to the higher goals of "extraordinary" men. Once the deed is done, however, he finds himself racked with confusion, paranoia, and disgust. His theoretical justifications lose all their power as he struggles with guilt and horror and confronts both the internal and external consequences of his deed.

Strakhov remarked that "Only Crime and Punishment was read in 1866" and that Dostoevsky had managed to portray a Russian person aptly and realistically. In contrast, Grigory Eliseev of the radical magazine The Contemporary called the novel a "fantasy according to which the entire student body is accused without exception of attempting murder and robbery". The Encyclopædia Britannica describes Crime and Punishment as "a masterpiece" and "one of the finest studies of the psychopathology of guilt written in any language."

The title is an ironic reference to the central character of the novel, Prince Lev Nikolayevich Myshkin , a young man whose goodness, open-hearted simplicity and guilelessness lead many of the more worldly characters he encounters to mistakenly assume that he lacks intelligence and insight. In the character of Prince Myshkin, Dostoevsky set himself the task of depicting "the positively good and beautiful man." The novel examines the consequences of placing such a singular individual at the center of the conflicts, desires, passions and egoism of worldly society, both for the man himself and for those with whom he becomes involved.

Joseph Frank describes The Idiot as "the most personal of all Dostoevsky's major works, the book in which he embodies his most intimate, cherished, and sacred convictions." It includes descriptions of some of his most intense personal ordeals, such as epilepsy and mock execution, and explores moral, spiritual and philosophical themes consequent upon them. His primary motivation in writing the novel was to subject his own highest ideal, that of true Christian love, to the crucible of contemporary Russian society.

Demons is a social and political satire, a psychological drama, and a large-scale tragedy. Joyce Carol Oates has described it as Dostoevsky's most confused and violent novel, and his most satisfactorily "tragic' work". According to Ronald Hingley , it is Dostoevsky's "greatest onslaught on Nihilism", and "one of humanity's most impressive achievements — perhaps even its supreme achievement — in the art of prose fiction."

Demons is an allegory of the potentially catastrophic consequences of the political and moral nihilism that was becoming prevalent in Russia in the 1860s. A fictional town descends into chaos as it becomes the focal point of an attempted revolution, orchestrated by master conspirator Pyotr Verkhovensky. The mysterious aristocratic figure of Nikolai Stavrogin — Verkhovensky's counterpart in the moral sphere — dominates the book, exercising an extraordinary influence over the hearts and minds of almost all the other characters. The idealistic, Western-influenced generation of the 1840s, epitomised in the character of Stepan Verkhovensky (who is both Pyotr Verkhovensky's father and Nikolai Stavrogin's childhood teacher), is presented as the unconscious progenitors and helpless accomplices of the "demonic" forces that take possession of the town.

The Brothers Karamazov is Dostoevsky's largest work. It received both critical and popular acclaim and, like Crime and Punishment , is often cited as his magnum opus. Composed of 12 "books", the novel tells the story of three brothers: the novice monk Alyosha , the non-believer Ivan, and the soldier Dmitri. The main plot is the death of their father, Fyodor Karamazov, while other parts are philosophical and religious arguments by Father Zosima to Alyosha.

The most famous chapter is " The Grand Inquisitor ", a parable told by Ivan to Alyosha about Christ's Second Coming in Seville , Spain, in which Christ is imprisoned by a ninety-year-old Catholic Grand Inquisitor . Instead of answering him, Christ gives him a kiss, and the Inquisitor subsequently releases him, telling him not to return. The tale has been misunderstood as a defence of the Inquisitor, but some, such as Romano Guardini , argue that the Christ of the parable was Ivan's own interpretation of Christ, "the idealistic product of the unbelief". Ivan, however, has stated that he is against Christ. Most contemporary critics and scholars agree that Dostoevsky is attacking Roman Catholicism and socialist atheism, both represented by the Inquisitor. He warns the readers against a terrible revelation in the future, referring to the Donation of Pepin around 750 and the Spanish Inquisition in the 16th century, which in his view corrupted true Christianity.

Sigmund Freud wrote an essay called " Dostoevsky and Parricide " (German: Dostojewski und die Vatertötung) as an introductory article to a scholarly collection on The Brothers Karamazov .

Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche (15 October 1844 – 25 August 1900) was a German philosopher and writer who started his career as a classical philologist and turned to philosophy early in his academic career. In 1869, at age 24, he was appointed Professor of Classical Philology at the University of Basel . Plagued by health problems for most of his life, he resigned from the university in 1879. He afterward lived as an independent writer, spending much of his life in relative solitude and financial insecurity while moving between Switzerland , Italy , and southern France in search of climates that might alleviate his condition, and in the following decade, he completed much of his core writing . In 1889, aged 44, he suffered a neurological collapse, and thereafter a complete loss of his mental faculties, with paralysis and vascular dementia ; he lived out his remaining 11 years, first under the care of his mother, and later his sister, until his death. His works and his philosophy have fostered not only extensive scholarship but also much popular interest.

Nietzsche's work encompasses poetry, cultural criticism , and philosophical essays while displaying a fondness for aphorisms and irony . Prominent elements of his philosophy include his critique of objective truth in favour of perspectivism ; a genealogical critique of Christian morality and a related theory of master–slave morality ; the affirmation of life in response to both the weakening of religion ("God is dead") and the crisis of passive nihilism which followed it; the notion of Apollonian and Dionysian duality; and a characterisation of the human subject as the expression of competing wills , collectively understood as the will-to-power . His later work developed influential concepts such as the Übermensch , the transvaluation of values , and his unique formulation of eternal return . His body of work touched a wide range of topics, including aesthetic , philology , history , music , religion , tragedy , culture and science , and drew inspiration from such diverse sources as Greek tragedy , Arthur Schopenhauer , Ralph Waldo Emerson , and Richard Wagner .

After Nietzsche's death, his sister, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche , became the curator and editor of his manuscripts. She edited his unpublished writings to fit her German ultranationalist ideology, often contradicting or obfuscating Nietzsche's stated opinions, which were explicitly opposed to antisemitism and nationalism . Through her published editions, Nietzsche's work became associated with fascism and Nazism . Twentieth-century scholars such as Walter Kaufmann , R. J. Hollingdale and Georges Bataille defended Nietzsche against this interpretation, and corrected editions of his writings were soon made available. His works enjoyed renewed popularity in the 1960s and his ideas have since had a widespread impact on 20th- and 21st-century thinkers across philosophy—especially in schools of continental philosophy such as existentialism , postmodernism and post-structuralism —as well as art, literature, music, poetry, politics and popular culture.

Born on 15 October 1844, Nietzsche grew up in the town of Röcken (now part of Lützen ), near Leipzig , in the Prussian Province of Saxony . He was named after King Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia , who turned 49 on the day of Nietzsche's birth (Nietzsche later dropped his middle name, Wilhelm). Nietzsche's great-grandfather, Gotthelf Engelbert Nietzsche [ ja ] (1714–1804), was an inspector and a philosopher. Nietzsche's grandfather, Friedrich August Ludwig Nietzsche [ de ] (1756–1826), was a theologian. Nietzsche's parents, Carl Ludwig Nietzsche (1813–1849), a Lutheran pastor and former teacher; and Franziska Nietzsche [ de ] ( née Oehler) (1826–1897), married in 1843, the year before Friedrich's birth. They had two other children: a daughter, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche , born in 1846; and a second son, Ludwig Joseph, born in 1848. Nietzsche's father died of a brain disease in 1849, after a year of excruciating agony, when the boy was only four years old; Ludwig Joseph died six months later at age two. The family then moved to Naumburg , where they lived with Nietzsche's maternal grandmother and his father's two unmarried sisters. After the death of Nietzsche's grandmother in 1856, the family moved into their own house, now Nietzsche-Haus , a museum, and Nietzsche study centre.

Nietzsche attended a boys' school and then a private school, where he became friends with Gustav Krug and Wilhelm Pinder, both of whom came from highly respected families. Academic records from one of the schools attended by Nietzsche noted that he excelled in Christian theology .

In 1854 he began to attend the Gymnasium in Naumburg. Because his father had worked for the state (as a pastor), the now-fatherless Nietzsche was offered a scholarship to study at Schulpforta . That Nietzsche was admitted on the strength of his academic competence has been debunked: his grades were not near the top of the class. He studied there from 1858 to 1864, becoming friends with Paul Deussen and Carl von Gersdorff (1844–1904), who later became a jurist. He also found time to work on poems and musical compositions. Nietzsche led "Germania", a music and literature club, during his summers in Naumburg. At Schulpforta, Nietzsche received an important grounding in languages— Greek , Latin , Hebrew , and French—to be able to read important primary sources ; he also experienced for the first time being away from his family life in a small-town conservative environment. His end-of-semester exams in March 1864 showed a 1 in Religion and German; a 2a in Greek and Latin; a 2b in French, History, and Physics; and a "lackluster" 3 in Hebrew and Mathematics.

Nietzsche was an amateur composer. He composed several works for voice, piano, and violin beginning in 1858 at the Schulpforta in Naumburg when he started to work on musical compositions. Richard Wagner was dismissive of Nietzsche's music, allegedly mocking a birthday gift of a piano composition sent by Nietzsche in 1871 to Wagner's wife Cosima . German conductor and pianist Hans von Bülow also described another of Nietzsche's pieces as "the most undelightful and the most anti-musical draft on musical paper that I have faced in a long time".

While at Schulpforta Nietzsche pursued subjects that were considered unbecoming. He became acquainted with the work of the then-almost-unknown poet Friedrich Hölderlin , calling him "my favourite poet" and writing an essay in which he said that the poet raised consciousness to "the most sublime ideality". The teacher who corrected the essay gave it a good mark but commented that Nietzsche should concern himself in the future with healthier, more lucid, and more "German" writers. Additionally, he became acquainted with Ernst Ortlepp , an eccentric, blasphemous , and often drunken poet who was found dead in a ditch weeks after meeting Nietzsche but who may have introduced Nietzsche to the music and writing of Richard Wagner . Perhaps under Ortlepp's influence, he and a student named Richter returned to school drunk and encountered a teacher, resulting in Nietzsche's demotion from first in his class and the end of his status as a prefect .

After graduation in September 1864, Nietzsche began studying theology and classical philology at the University of Bonn in the hope of becoming a minister . For a short time, he and Deussen became members of the Burschenschaft (student association) Frankonia . After one semester (and to the anger of his mother), he stopped his theological studies and lost his faith. As early as his 1862 essay "Fate and History", Nietzsche argued that historical research had discredited the central teachings of Christianity, but David Strauss 's Life of Jesus also seems to have had a profound effect on the young man. In addition, Ludwig Feuerbach 's The Essence of Christianity influenced young Nietzsche with its argument that people created God and not the other way around. In June 1865, at the age of 20, Nietzsche wrote to his sister Elisabeth, who was deeply religious, a letter regarding his loss of faith. This letter contains the following statement:

Hence the ways of men part: if you wish to strive for peace of soul and pleasure, then believe; if you wish to be a devotee of truth, then inquire....

Nietzsche subsequently concentrated on studying philology under Professor Friedrich Wilhelm Ritschl , whom he followed to the University of Leipzig in 1865. There, he became close friends with his fellow-student Erwin Rohde . Nietzsche's first philological publications appeared soon after.

In 1865 Nietzsche thoroughly studied the works of Arthur Schopenhauer . He owed the awakening of his philosophical interest to reading Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation , later admitting that Schopenhauer was one of the few thinkers whom he respected, dedicating the essay " Schopenhauer as Educator " in the Untimely Meditations to him.

In 1866 he read Friedrich Albert Lange 's History of Materialism . Lange's descriptions of Immanuel Kant 's anti-materialistic philosophy, the rise of European Materialism , Europe's increased concern with science, Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution and the general rebellion against tradition and authority intrigued Nietzsche greatly. Nietzsche would ultimately argue the impossibility of an evolutionary explanation of the human aesthetic sense.

In 1867 Nietzsche signed up for one year of voluntary service with the Prussian artillery division in Naumburg. He was regarded as one of the finest riders among his fellow-recruits, and his officers predicted that he would soon reach the rank of captain . In March 1868, while mounting his horse, Nietzsche struck his chest against the pommel and tore two muscles in his left side, leaving him exhausted and unable to walk for months. Consequently, he turned his attention to his studies again, completing them in 1868. Nietzsche also met Richard Wagner for the first time later that year.



In 1869, with Ritschl's support, Nietzsche received an offer to become a professor of classical philology at the University of Basel in Switzerland. He was only 24 years old and had neither completed his doctorate nor received a teaching certificate (" habilitation "). He was awarded an honorary doctorate by Leipzig University in March 1869, again with Ritschl's support.

Despite his offer coming at a time when he was considering giving up philology for science, he accepted. To this day, Nietzsche is still among the youngest of the tenured Classics professors on record.

Nietzsche's 1870 projected doctoral thesis , "Contribution toward the Study and the Critique of the Sources of Diogenes Laertius" (" Beiträge zur Quellenkunde und Kritik des Laertius Diogenes "), examined the origins of the ideas of Diogenes Laërtius . Though never submitted, it was later published as a Gratulationsschrift ('congratulatory publication') in Basel .

Before moving to Basel, Nietzsche renounced his Prussian citizenship: for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless .

Nevertheless, Nietzsche served in the Prussian forces during the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871) as a medical orderly . In his short time in the military, he experienced much and witnessed the traumatic effects of battle. He also contracted diphtheria and dysentery . Walter Kaufmann speculates that he also contracted syphilis at a brothel along with his other infections at this time. On returning to Basel in 1870, Nietzsche observed the establishment of the German Empire and Otto von Bismarck 's subsequent policies as an outsider and with a degree of scepticism regarding their genuineness. His inaugural lecture at the university was " Homer and Classical Philology ". Nietzsche also met Franz Overbeck , a professor of theology who remained his friend throughout his life, Afrikan Spir , a little-known Russian philosopher responsible for the 1873 Thought and Reality and Nietzsche's colleague, the historian Jacob Burckhardt , whose lectures Nietzsche frequently attended, began to exercise significant influence on him.

Nietzsche had already met Richard Wagner in Leipzig in 1868 and later Wagner's wife, Cosima. Nietzsche admired both greatly and during his time at Basel frequently visited Wagner's house in Tribschen in Lucerne . The Wagners brought Nietzsche into their most intimate circle—which included Franz Liszt , of whom Nietzsche colloquially described: "Liszt or the art of running after women!" Nietzsche enjoyed the attention he gave to the beginning of the Bayreuth Festival . In 1870 he gave Cosima Wagner the manuscript of "The Genesis of the Tragic Idea" as a birthday gift. In 1872 Nietzsche published his first book, The Birth of Tragedy . His colleagues within his field, including Ritschl, expressed little enthusiasm for the work in which Nietzsche eschewed the classical philologic method in favour of a more speculative approach. In his polemic Philology of the Future , Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff damped the book's reception and increased its notoriety. In response, Rohde (then a professor in Kiel ) and Wagner came to Nietzsche's defence. Nietzsche remarked freely about the isolation he felt within the philological community and attempted unsuccessfully to transfer to a position in philosophy at Basel.

In 1873 Nietzsche began to accumulate notes that would be posthumously published as Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks . Between 1873 and 1876, he published four separate long essays: " David Strauss : the Confessor and the Writer", " On the Use and Abuse of History for Life ", "Schopenhauer as Educator", and "Richard Wagner in Bayreuth". These four later appeared in a collected edition under the title Untimely Meditations . The essays shared the orientation of a cultural critique, challenging the developing German culture suggested by Schopenhauer and Wagner. During this time in the circle of the Wagners, he met Malwida von Meysenbug and Hans von Bülow . He also began a friendship with Paul Rée who, in 1876, influenced him into dismissing the pessimism in his early writings. He was deeply disappointed by the Bayreuth Festival of 1876, where the banality of the shows and baseness of the public repelled him. He was also alienated by Wagner's championing of "German culture", which Nietzsche felt a contradiction in terms, as well as by Wagner's celebration of his fame among the German public. All this contributed to his subsequent decision to distance himself from Wagner.

With the publication in 1878 of Human, All Too Human (a book of aphorisms ranging from metaphysics to morality to religion), a new style of Nietzsche's work became clear, highly influenced by Afrikan Spir 's Thought and Reality and reacting against the pessimistic philosophy of Wagner and Schopenhauer. Nietzsche's friendship with Deussen and Rohde cooled as well. In 1879, after a significant decline in health, Nietzsche had to resign his position at Basel and was pensioned. Beginning in his childhood, various disruptive illnesses had plagued him, including moments of shortsightedness that left him nearly blind, migraine headaches, and violent indigestion. The 1868 riding accident and diseases in 1870 may have aggravated these persistent conditions, which continued to affect him through his years at Basel, forcing him to take longer and longer holidays until regular work became impractical.



Living on his pension from Basel along with aid from friends, Nietzsche travelled frequently to find climates more conducive to his health. He lived until 1889 as an independent author in different cities. He spent many summers in Sils Maria near St. Moritz in Switzerland, and many of his winters in the Italian cities of Genoa , Rapallo , and Turin , and the French city of Nice . In 1881, when France occupied Tunisia , he planned to travel to Tunis to view Europe from the outside but later abandoned that idea, probably for health reasons. Nietzsche occasionally returned to Naumburg to visit his family, and, especially during this time, he and his sister, Elisabeth, had repeated periods of conflict and reconciliation.

While in Genoa , Nietzsche's failing eyesight prompted him to explore the use of typewriters as a means of continuing to write. He is known to have tried using the Hansen Writing Ball , a contemporary typewriter device. In the end, a past pupil of his, Peter Gast , became a private secretary to Nietzsche. In 1876, Gast transcribed the crabbed, nearly illegible handwriting of Nietzsche's first encounter with Richard Wagner in Bayreuth. He subsequently transcribed and proofread the galleys for almost all of Nietzsche's work. On at least one occasion, on 23 February 1880, the usually poor Gast received 200 Marks from their mutual friend, Paul Rée. Gast was one of the very few friends Nietzsche allowed to criticise him. In responding most enthusiastically to Also Sprach Zarathustra ("Thus Spoke Zarathustra"), Gast did feel it necessary to point out that what were described as "superfluous" people were in fact quite necessary. He went on to list the number of people Epicurus , for example, had to rely on to supply his simple diet of goat cheese.

To the end of his life, Gast and Overbeck remained consistently faithful friends. Malwida von Meysenbug remained like a motherly patron even outside the Wagner circle. Soon Nietzsche made contact with the music-critic Carl Fuchs. Nietzsche stood at the beginning of his most productive period. Beginning with Human, All Too Human in 1878, Nietzsche published one book or major section of a book each year until 1888, his last year of writing; that year, he completed five.

In 1882 Nietzsche published the first part of The Gay Science . That year he also met Lou Andreas-Salomé , through Malwida von Meysenbug and Paul Rée .

Salomé's mother took her to Rome when Salomé was 21. At a literary salon in the city, Salomé became acquainted with Paul Rée . Rée proposed marriage to her, but she, instead, proposed that they should live and study together as "brother and sister", along with another man for company, where they would establish an academic commune. Rée accepted the idea and suggested that they be joined by his friend Nietzsche. The two met Nietzsche in Rome in April 1882, and Nietzsche is believed to have instantly fallen in love with Salomé, as Rée had done. Nietzsche asked Rée to propose marriage to Salomé, which she rejected. She had been interested in Nietzsche as a friend, but not as a husband. Nietzsche nonetheless was content to join with Rée and Salomé touring through Switzerland and Italy together, planning their commune. The three travelled with Salomé's mother through Italy and considered where they would set up their "Winterplan" commune. They intended to set up their commune in an abandoned monastery, but no suitable location was found. On 13 May, in Lucerne, when Nietzsche was alone with Salomé, he earnestly proposed marriage to her again, which she rejected. He nonetheless was happy to continue with the plans for an academic commune. After discovering the relationship, Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth became determined to get Nietzsche away from the "immoral woman". Nietzsche and Salomé spent the summer together in Tautenburg in Thuringia, often with Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth as a chaperone. Salomé reports that he asked her to marry him on three separate occasions and that she refused, though the reliability of her reports of events is questionable. Arriving in Leipzig (Germany) in October, Salomé and Rée separated from Nietzsche after a falling-out between Nietzsche and Salomé, in which Salomé believed that Nietzsche was desperately in love with her.

While the three spent a number of weeks together in Leipzig in October 1882, the following month Rée and Salomé left Nietzsche, leaving for Stibbe (modern-day Zdbowo in Poland) without any plans to meet again. Nietzsche soon fell into a period of mental anguish, although he continued to write to Rée, stating "We shall see one another from time to time, won't we?" In later recriminations, Nietzsche would blame on separate occasions the failure in his attempts to woo Salomé on Salomé, Rée, and on the intrigues of his sister (who had written letters to the families of Salomé and Rée to disrupt the plans for the commune). Nietzsche wrote of the affair in 1883, that he now felt "genuine hatred for my sister".

Amidst renewed bouts of illness, living in near-isolation after a falling out with his mother and sister regarding Salomé, Nietzsche fled to Rapallo, where he wrote the first part of Also Sprach Zarathustra in only ten days.

By 1882 Nietzsche was taking huge doses of opium and continued to have trouble sleeping. In 1883, while staying in Nice, he was writing out his own prescriptions for the sedative chloral hydrate , signing them "Dr. Nietzsche".

He turned away from the influence of Arthur Schopenhauer , and after he severed his social ties with Wagner, Nietzsche had few remaining friends. Now, with the new style of Zarathustra , his work became even more alienating, and the market received it only to the degree required by politeness. Nietzsche recognised this and maintained his solitude, though he often complained. His books remained largely unsold. In 1885, he printed only 40 copies of the fourth part of Zarathustra and distributed a fraction of them among close friends, including Helene von Druskowitz .

In 1883 he tried and failed to obtain a lecturing post at the University of Leipzig . According to a letter he wrote to Peter Gast, this was due to his "attitude towards Christianity and the concept of God".

In 1886 Nietzsche broke with his publisher Ernst Schmeitzner, disgusted by his antisemitic opinions. Nietzsche saw his own writings as "completely buried and in this anti-Semitic dump" of Schmeitzner—associating the publisher with a movement that should be "utterly rejected with cold contempt by every sensible mind". He then printed Beyond Good and Evil at his own expense. He also acquired the publication rights for his earlier works and over the next year issued second editions of The Birth of Tragedy , Human, All Too Human , Daybreak , and of The Gay Science with new prefaces placing the body of his work in a more coherent perspective. Thereafter, he saw his work as completed for a time and hoped that soon a readership would develop. In fact, interest in Nietzsche's thought did increase at this time, if rather slowly and imperceptibly to him. During these years Nietzsche met Meta von Salis , Carl Spitteler and Gottfried Keller .

In 1886 his sister, Elisabeth, married the antisemite Bernhard Förster and travelled to Paraguay to found Nueva Germania , a "Germanic" colony. Through correspondence, Nietzsche's relationship with Elisabeth continued through cycles of conflict and reconciliation, but they met again only after his collapse. He continued to have frequent and painful attacks of illness, which made prolonged work impossible.

In 1887 Nietzsche wrote the polemic On the Genealogy of Morality . During the same year, he encountered the work of Fyodor Dostoevsky , to whom he felt an immediate kinship. He also exchanged letters with Hippolyte Taine and Georg Brandes . Brandes, who had started to teach the philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard in the 1870s, wrote to Nietzsche asking him to read Kierkegaard , to which Nietzsche replied that he would come to Copenhagen and read Kierkegaard with him. Before fulfilling this promise, Nietzsche slipped too far into illness. At the beginning of 1888, Brandes delivered in Copenhagen one of the first lectures on Nietzsche's philosophy.

Although Nietzsche had previously announced at the end of On the Genealogy of Morality a new work with the title The Will to Power : Attempt at a Revaluation of All Values , he seems to have abandoned this idea and, instead, used some of the draft passages to compose Twilight of the Idols and The Antichrist in 1888.

His health improved and he spent the summer in high spirits. In the autumn of 1888, his writings and letters began to reveal a higher estimation of his own status and "fate". He overestimated the increasing response to his writings, especially to the recent polemic, The Case of Wagner . On his 44th birthday, after completing Twilight of the Idols and The Antichrist , he decided to write the autobiography Ecce Homo . In its preface—which suggests Nietzsche was well aware of the interpretive difficulties his work would generate—he declares, "Hear me! For I am such and such a person. Above all, do not mistake me for someone else." In December, Nietzsche began a correspondence with August Strindberg and thought that, short of an international breakthrough, he would attempt to buy back his older writings from the publisher and have them translated into other European languages. Moreover, he planned the publication of the compilation Nietzsche contra Wagner and of the poems that made up his collection Dionysian-Dithyrambs .



On 3 January 1889, Nietzsche suffered a mental breakdown . Two policemen approached him after he caused a public disturbance in the streets of Turin . What happened remains unknown, but an often-repeated tale from shortly after his death states that Nietzsche witnessed the flogging of a horse at the other end of the Piazza Carlo Alberto, ran to the horse, threw his arms around its neck to protect it and then collapsed to the ground. In the following few days Nietzsche sent short writings—known as the Wahnzettel or Wahnbriefe (literally "Delusion notes" or "letters")—to a number of friends including Cosima Wagner and Jacob Burckhardt . Most of them were signed " Dionysus ", though some were also signed "der Gekreuzigte" meaning "the crucified one". To his former colleague Burckhardt, Nietzsche wrote:

I have had Caiaphas put in fetters . Also, last year I was crucified by the German doctors in a very drawn-out manner. Wilhelm , Bismarck , and all anti-Semites abolished.

Additionally, he commanded the German emperor to go to Rome to be shot and summoned the European powers to take military action against Germany, writing also that the pope should be put in jail and that he, Nietzsche, created the world and was in the process of having all antisemites shot dead.

On 6 January 1889 Burckhardt showed the letter he had received from Nietzsche to Overbeck. The following day, Overbeck received a similar letter and decided that Nietzsche's friends had to bring him back to Basel. Overbeck travelled to Turin and brought Nietzsche to a psychiatric clinic in Basel. By that time Nietzsche appeared fully in the grip of a serious mental illness, and his mother Franziska decided to transfer him to a clinic in Jena under the direction of Otto Binswanger . In January 1889, they proceeded with the planned release of Twilight of the Idols , by that time already printed and bound. From November 1889 to February 1890, the art historian Julius Langbehn attempted to cure Nietzsche, claiming that the methods of the medical doctors were ineffective in treating Nietzsche's condition. Langbehn assumed progressively greater control of Nietzsche until his secretiveness discredited him. In March 1890, Franziska removed Nietzsche from the clinic and, in May 1890, brought him to her home in Naumburg. During this process Overbeck and Gast contemplated what to do with Nietzsche's unpublished works. In February they ordered a fifty-copy private edition of Nietzsche contra Wagner , but the publisher C. G. Naumann secretly printed one hundred. Overbeck and Gast decided to withhold publishing The Antichrist and Ecce Homo because of their more radical content. Nietzsche's reception and recognition enjoyed their first surge.

In 1893, Nietzsche's sister, Elisabeth, returned from Nueva Germania in Paraguay following the suicide of her husband. She studied Nietzsche's works and, piece by piece, took control of their publication. Overbeck was dismissed and Gast finally co-operated. After the death of Franziska in 1897, Nietzsche lived in Weimar , where Elisabeth cared for him and allowed visitors, including Rudolf Steiner (who in 1895 had written Friedrich Nietzsche: A Fighter Against His Time , one of the first books praising Nietzsche), to meet her uncommunicative brother. Elisabeth employed Steiner as a tutor to help her to understand her brother's philosophy. Steiner abandoned the attempt after only a few months, declaring that it was impossible to teach her anything about philosophy.

Nietzsche's insanity was originally diagnosed as tertiary syphilis , in accordance with a prevailing medical paradigm of the time. Although most commentators [ who? ] regard his breakdown as unrelated to his philosophy, Georges Bataille wrote poetically of his condition ("'Man incarnate' must also go mad") and René Girard 's postmortem psychoanalysis posits a worshipful rivalry with Richard Wagner . Girard suggests that Nietzsche signed his final letters as both Dionysus and the Crucified One because he was demonstrating that by being a god (Dionysus), one is also a victim (Crucified One) since a god still suffers by overcoming the law. Nietzsche had previously written, "All superior men who were irresistibly drawn to throw off the yoke of any kind of morality and to frame new laws had, if they were not actually mad, no alternative but to make themselves or pretend to be mad." ( Daybreak , 14) The diagnosis of syphilis has since been challenged and a diagnosis of " manic-depressive illness with periodic psychosis followed by vascular dementia " was put forward by Cybulska prior to Schain's study. Leonard Sax suggested the slow growth of a right-sided retro-orbital meningioma as an explanation of Nietzsche's dementia; Orth and Trimble postulated frontotemporal dementia while other researchers have proposed a hereditary stroke disorder called CADASIL . Poisoning by mercury , a treatment for syphilis at the time of Nietzsche's death, has also been suggested.

In 1898 and 1899 Nietzsche suffered at least two strokes. They partially paralysed him, leaving him unable to speak or walk. He likely suffered from clinical hemiparesis /hemiplegia on the left side of his body by 1899. After contracting pneumonia in mid-August 1900, he suffered another stroke during the night of 24–25 August and died at about noon on 25 August. Elisabeth had him buried beside his father at the church in Röcken near Lützen . His friend and secretary Gast gave his funeral oration, proclaiming: "Holy be your name to all future generations!"

Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche compiled The Will to Power from Nietzsche's unpublished notebooks and published it posthumously in 1901. Because his sister arranged the book based on her own conflation of several of Nietzsche's early outlines and took liberties with the material, the scholarly consensus has been that it does not reflect Nietzsche's intent. (For example, Elisabeth removed aphorism 35 of The Antichrist , where Nietzsche rewrote a passage of the Bible.) Mazzino Montinari , the editor of Nietzsche's Nachlass , called it a forgery. [ incomplete short citation ] Yet, the endeavour to rescue Nietzsche's reputation by discrediting The Will to Power often leads to scepticism about the value of his late notes, even of his whole Nachlass . His Nachlass and The Will to Power are distinct.

General commentators and Nietzsche scholars, whether emphasising his cultural background or his language, overwhelmingly label Nietzsche as a "German philosopher". Others do not assign him a national category. While Germany had not yet been unified into a single sovereign state, Nietzsche was born a citizen of Prussia , which was mostly part of the German Confederation . His birthplace, Röcken , is in the modern German state of Saxony-Anhalt . When he accepted his post at Basel, Nietzsche applied for annulment of his Prussian citizenship. The official revocation of his citizenship came in a document dated 17 April 1869, and for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless .

At least towards the end of his life, Nietzsche believed his ancestors were Polish . He wore a signet ring bearing the Radwan coat of arms , traceable back to Polish nobility of medieval times and the surname "Nicki" of the Polish noble ( szlachta ) family bearing that coat of arms. Gotard Nietzsche, a member of the Nicki family, left Poland for Prussia . His descendants later settled in the Electorate of Saxony circa the year 1700. Nietzsche wrote in 1888, "My ancestors were Polish noblemen (Nietzky); the type seems to have been well preserved despite three generations of German mothers." At one point, Nietzsche became even more adamant about his Polish identity. "I am a pure-blooded Polish nobleman, without a single drop of bad blood, certainly not German blood." On yet another occasion, Nietzsche stated, "Germany is a great nation only because its people have so much Polish blood in their veins.... I am proud of my Polish descent." Nietzsche believed his name might have been Germanised , in one letter claiming, "I was taught to ascribe the origin of my blood and name to Polish noblemen who were called Niëtzky and left their home and nobleness about a hundred years ago, finally yielding to unbearable suppression: they were Protestants ."

Most scholars dispute Nietzsche's account of his family's origins. Hans von Müller debunked the genealogy put forward by Nietzsche's sister in favour of Polish noble heritage. Max Oehler , Nietzsche's cousin and curator of the Nietzsche Archive at Weimar , argued that all of Nietzsche's ancestors bore German names, including the wives' families. Oehler claims that Nietzsche came from a long line of German Lutheran clergymen on both sides of his family, and modern scholars regard the claim of Nietzsche's Polish ancestry as "pure invention". Colli and Montinari, the editors of Nietzsche's assembled letters, gloss Nietzsche's claims as a "mistaken belief" and "without foundation". The name Nietzsche itself is not a Polish name, but an exceptionally common one throughout central Germany, in this and cognate forms (such as Nitsche and Nitzke ). The name derives from the forename Nikolaus , abbreviated to Nick ; assimilated with the Slavic Nitz ; it first became Nitsche and then Nietzsche .

It is not known why Nietzsche wanted to be thought of as Polish nobility. According to the biographer R. J. Hollingdale , Nietzsche's propagation of the Polish ancestry myth may have been part of his "campaign against Germany". Nicholas D. More states that Nietzsche's claims of having an illustrious lineage were a parody on autobiographical conventions, and suspects Ecce Homo , with its self-laudatory titles, such as " Why I Am So Wise ", as being a work of satire. He concludes that Nietzsche's supposed Polish genealogy was a joke—not a delusion.

Nietzsche was never married. He proposed to Lou Salomé three times and each time was rejected. One theory blames Salomé's view on sexuality as one of the reasons for her alienation from Nietzsche. As articulated in her 1898 novella Fenitschka , Salomé viewed the idea of sexual intercourse as prohibitive and marriage as a violation, with some suggesting that they indicated sexual repression and neurosis .

Deussen cited the episode of Cologne 's brothel in February 1865 as instrumental to understanding the philosopher's way of thinking, mostly about women. Nietzsche was surreptitiously accompanied to a "call house" from which he clumsily escaped upon seeing "a half dozen apparitions dressed in sequins and veils." According to Deussen, Nietzsche "never decided to remain unmarried all his life. For him, women had to sacrifice themselves to the care and benefit of men." Nietzsche scholar Joachim Köhler [ de ] has attempted to explain Nietzsche's life history and philosophy by claiming that he was homosexual. Köhler argues that Nietzsche's supposed syphilis, which is "usually considered to be the product of his encounter with a prostitute in a brothel in Cologne or Leipzig , is equally likely. Some maintain that Nietzsche contracted it in a male brothel in Genoa ." The acquisition of the infection from a homosexual brothel was the theory believed by Sigmund Freud , who cited Otto Binswanger as his source. Köhler also suggests that Nietzsche had a romantic relationship, as well as a friendship, with Paul Rée . It has been claimed that Nietzsche's homosexuality was widely known in the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society , with Nietzsche's friend Paul Deussen claiming that "he was a man who had never touched a woman."

Köhler's views have not found wide acceptance among Nietzsche scholars and commentators. Allan Megill argues that, while Köhler's claim that Nietzsche was conflicted about his homosexual desire cannot simply be dismissed, "the evidence is very weak", and Köhler may be projecting twentieth-century understandings of sexuality on nineteenth-century notions of friendship. It is also rumoured that Nietzsche frequented heterosexual brothels. Nigel Rodgers and Mel Thompson have argued that continuous sickness and headaches hindered Nietzsche from engaging much with women. Yet they offer examples of Nietzsche's expressing affection to women, including Wagner's wife Cosima Wagner . On Cosima's birthday, on 19 December 1876, Nietzsche, hoping "to gain a confidant", sent her "a trusting letter".

Scholars have argued that Köhler's sexuality-based interpretation is not helpful in understanding Nietzsche's philosophy. Some stress that, if Nietzsche preferred men—with this preference constituting his psychosexual make-up—but could not admit his desires to himself, it meant he acted in conflict with his philosophy.

Because of Nietzsche's evocative style and provocative ideas, his philosophy generates passionate reactions. His works remain controversial, due to varying interpretations. In Western philosophy, Nietzsche's writings have been described as a case of free revolutionary thought, that is, revolutionary in its structure and problems, although not tied to any revolutionary project. His writings have also been described as a revolutionary project in which his philosophy serves as the foundation of a European cultural rebirth.

The Apollonian and Dionysian is a two-fold philosophical concept based on two figures in ancient Greek mythology, Apollo and Dionysus . This relationship takes the form of a dialectic . Even though the concept is related to The Birth of Tragedy , the poet Friedrich Hölderlin had already spoken of it, and Johann Joachim Winckelmann had talked of Dionysus' Roman equivalent, Bacchus .

Nietzsche found in classical Athenian tragedy an art form that transcended the pessimism found in the so-called wisdom of Silenus . The Greek spectators, by looking into the abyss of human suffering depicted by characters on stage, passionately and joyously affirmed life, finding it worth living. The main theme in The Birth of Tragedy is that the fusion of Dionysian and Apollonian Kunsttriebe ("artistic impulses") forms dramatic arts or tragedies. He argued that this fusion has not been achieved since the ancient Greek tragedians . Apollo represents harmony, progress, clarity, logic and the principle of individuation , whereas Dionysus represents disorder, intoxication, emotion, ecstasy and unity (hence the omission of the principle of individuation).

Nietzsche strongly distinguishes his Dionysus from the Dionysus of the Orphic tradition, which he considers a later corruption of the original Dionysian force. To him in the pre-Homeric world, Dionysian civilisations were marked by barbarism, cruelty, and ecstatic sexual excess, unrestrained by rational or moral principles. Nietzsche associates this period with unmediated life-affirmation, where violence and eroticism intertwined as expressions of raw vitality. The Orphics, overwhelmed by anxiety toward this unmitigated savagery, reacted by turning away from the physical world and abstracting their gods into metaphysical ideas. In doing so, they transformed Dionysus from a figure of visceral power into a god of suffering and redemption and, in parallel, converted man from a being of flesh and instincts into a soul burdened with guilt and the need for purification.

Nietzsche criticises this Orphic reinterpretation as an early decline in Greek spiritual health, arguing that it marked the beginning of an anti-life tendency that would later manifest in Platonism and Christianity. He further argues that Socrates and Euripides continued the Orphic trajectory, replacing instinct, myth, and artistic frenzy with rationalism, dialectic, and moral didacticism. By doing so, they undermined the ecstatic and violent balance of Apollonian and Dionysian forces, ultimately leading to the decline of Greek tragedy.

Nietzsche used these two forces because, for him, the world of mind and order on one side, and passion and chaos on the other, formed principles that were fundamental to the Greek culture : the Apollonian a dreaming state, full of illusions; and Dionysian a state of intoxication, representing the liberation of instincts and dissolution of boundaries. In this mould, a man appears as the satyr . He is the horror of the annihilation of the principle of individuality and at the same time someone who delights in its destruction.

Apollonian and Dionysian juxtapositions appear in the interplay of tragedy: the tragic hero of the drama, the main protagonist, struggles to make (Apollonian) order of his unjust and chaotic (Dionysian) fate, though he dies unfulfilled. Elaborating on the conception of Hamlet as an intellectual who cannot make up his mind, and is a living antithesis to the man of action, Nietzsche argues that a Dionysian figure possesses the conviction that his actions cannot change the eternal balance of things, and it disgusts him enough not to act at all. Hamlet falls under this category—he glimpsed the supernatural reality through the Ghost; he has gained 'true knowledge' and the conviction that no action of his has the power to change this. For the audience of such drama, this tragedy allows them to sense what Nietzsche called the Primordial Unity , which revives Dionysian nature. He describes primordial unity as the increase of strength, the experience of fullness and plenitude bestowed by frenzy . Frenzy acts as intoxication and is crucial for the physiological condition that enables the creation of any art. [ citation needed ] Stimulated by this state, a person's artistic will is enhanced:

In this state one enriches everything out of one's own fullness: whatever one sees, whatever wills is seen swelled, taut, strong, overloaded with strength. A man in this state transforms things until they mirror his power—until they are reflections of his perfection. This having to transform into perfection is—art.

Nietzsche is adamant that the works of Aeschylus and Sophocles represent the apex of artistic creation, the true realisation of tragedy; it is with Euripides , that tragedy begins its Untergang (literally 'going under' or 'downward-way;' meaning decline, deterioration, downfall, death, etc.). Nietzsche objects to Euripides' use of Socratic rationalism and morality in his tragedies, claiming that the infusion of ethics and reason robs tragedy of its foundation, namely the fragile balance of the Dionysian and Apollonian. Socrates emphasised reason to such a degree that he diffused the value of myth and suffering to human knowledge. Plato continued along this path in his dialogues, and the modern world eventually inherited reason at the expense of artistic impulses found in the Apollonian and Dionysian dichotomy. He notes that without the Apollonian, the Dionysian lacks the form and structure to make a coherent piece of art, and without the Dionysian, the Apollonian lacks the necessary vitality and passion. Only the fertile interplay of these two forces brought together as an art represented the best of Greek tragedy.

An example of the impact of this idea can be seen in the book Patterns of Culture , where the anthropologist Ruth Benedict acknowledges Nietzschean opposites of "Apollonian" and "Dionysian" as the stimulus for her thoughts about Native American cultures . Carl Jung has written extensively on the dichotomy in Psychological Types . Michel Foucault commented that his own book Madness and Civilization should be read "under the sun of the great Nietzschean inquiry". Here Foucault referenced Nietzsche's description of the birth and death of tragedy and his explanation that the subsequent tragedy of the Western world was the refusal of the tragic and, with that, refusal of the sacred. The painter Mark Rothko was influenced by Nietzsche's view of tragedy presented in The Birth of Tragedy.

The statement "God is dead", occurring in several of Nietzsche's works (notably in The Gay Science ), has become one of his best-known remarks. On the basis of it, many commentators regard Nietzsche as an atheist ; others (such as Kaufmann) suggest that this statement might reflect a more subtle understanding of divinity. Nietzsche predicted that the scientific developments and the increasing secularisation of Europe had 'killed' the Abrahamic God in a metaphorical sense, who had served as the basis for meaning and value in the West for more than a thousand years.

Nietzsche believed that Christian moral doctrine was originally constructed to counteract nihilism. It provides people with traditional beliefs about the moral values of good and evil, belief in God, and a framework with which one might claim to have objective knowledge . In constructing a world where objective knowledge is supposed to be possible, Christianity is an antidote to a primal form of nihilism—the despair of meaninglessness. As Martin Heidegger put the problem, "If God as the suprasensory ground and goal of all reality is dead, if the suprasensory world of the ideas has suffered the loss of its obligatory and above it its vitalising and upbuilding power, then nothing more remains to which man can cling and by which he can orient himself." [ incomplete short citation ]

One such reaction to the loss of meaning is what Nietzsche called passive nihilism , which he recognised in the pessimistic philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer . Schopenhauer's doctrine—which Nietzsche also referred to as Western Buddhism —advocates separating oneself from will and desires to reduce suffering. Nietzsche characterised this ascetic attitude as a "will to nothingness". Life turns away from itself as there is nothing of value to be found in the world. This moving away of all value in the world is characteristic of the nihilist, although, in this, the nihilist appears to be inconsistent; this "will to nothingness" is still a (disavowed) form of willing.

A nihilist is a man who judges that the real world ought not to be and that the world as it ought to do not exist. According to this view, our existence (action, suffering , willing, feeling) has no meaning: this 'in vain' is the nihilists' pathos—an inconsistency on the part of the nihilists.

— Friedrich Nietzsche, KSA 12:9 [60], taken from The Will to Power , section 585, translated by Walter Kaufmann

Nietzsche approached the problem of nihilism as a deeply personal one, stating that this problem of the modern world had "become conscious" in him. Furthermore, he emphasised the danger of nihilism and the possibilities it offers, as seen in his statement that "I praise, I do not reproach, [nihilism's] arrival. I believe it is one of the greatest crises, a moment of the deepest self-reflection of humanity. Whether man recovers from it, whether he becomes a master of this crisis, is a question of his strength!" According to Nietzsche, it is only when nihilism is overcome that a culture can have a true foundation on which to thrive. He wished to hasten its coming only so that he could also hasten its ultimate departure. Heidegger interpreted the death of God with what he explained as the death of metaphysics . He concluded that metaphysics has reached its potential and that the ultimate fate and downfall of metaphysics was proclaimed with the statement "God is dead."

Scholars such as Keiji Nishitani and Graham Parkes have aligned Nietzsche's religious thought with Buddhist thinkers, particularly those of the Mahayana tradition. Occasionally, Nietzsche has also been considered in relation to Catholic mystics such as Meister Eckhart . Milne has argued against such interpretations on the grounds that such thinkers from Western and Eastern religious traditions strongly emphasise the divestment of will and the loss of ego, while Nietzsche offers a robust defence of egoism. Milne argues that Nietzsche's religious thought is better understood in relation to his self-professed ancestors: " Heraclitus , Empedocles , Spinoza , Goethe ". Milne plays particularly close attention to Nietzsche's relationship to Goethe, who has typically been neglected in research by academic philosophers. Milne shows that Goethe's views on the one and the many allow a reciprocal determinism between part and whole, meaning that a claimed identity between part and whole does not give the part value solely in terms of belonging to the whole. In essence, this allows for a unitive sense of the individual's relationship to the universe, while also fostering a sense of "self-esteem" which Nietzsche found lacking in mystics such as Eckhart.

With regard to Nietzsche's development of thought, it has been noted in research that although he dealt with "nihilistic" themes ("pessimism, with nirvana and with nothingness and non-being" ) from 1869 onwards, a conceptual use of nihilism first took place in handwritten notes in mid-1880. This period saw the publication of a then popular work that reconstructed so-called "Russian nihilism" on the basis of Russian newspaper reports (N. Karlowitsch: The Development of Nihilism. Berlin 1880), which is significant for Nietzsche's terminology .

"Eternal return" (also known as "eternal recurrence") is a hypothetical concept that posits that the universe has been recurring, and will continue to recur, for an infinite number of times across infinite time or space. It is a purely physical concept, involving no supernatural reincarnation , but the return of beings in the same bodies. Nietzsche first proposed the idea of eternal return in a parable in Section 341 of The Gay Science , and also in the chapter "Of the Vision and the Riddle" in Thus Spoke Zarathustra , among other places. Nietzsche considered it as potentially "horrifying and paralyzing", and said that its burden is the "heaviest weight" imaginable (" das schwerste Gewicht "). The wish for the eternal return of all events would mark the ultimate affirmation of life, a reaction to Schopenhauer 's praise of denying the will-to-live. To comprehend eternal recurrence, and not only come to peace with it but embrace it, requires amor fati , "love of fate". As Martin Heidegger noted in his lectures on Nietzsche, Nietzsche's first mention of eternal recurrence presents this concept as a hypothetical question rather than stating it as fact. According to Heidegger, it is the burden imposed by the question of eternal recurrence – the mere possibility of it, and the reality of speculating on that possibility – which is so significant in modern thought: "The way Nietzsche here patterns the first communication of the thought of the 'greatest burden' [of eternal recurrence] makes it clear that this 'thought of thoughts' is at the same time 'the most burdensome thought.'"

Alexander Nehamas writes in Nietzsche: Life as Literature of three ways of seeing the eternal recurrence:

Nehamas concluded that, if individuals constitute themselves through their actions, they can only maintain themselves in their current state by living in a recurrence of past actions. Nietzsche's thought is the negation of the idea of a history of salvation.

Nietzsche claimed the death of God would eventually lead to the realisation that there can never be a universal perspective on things and that the traditional idea of objective truth is incoherent. [ incomplete short citation ] Nietzsche rejected the idea of objective reality, arguing that knowledge is contingent and conditional, relative to various fluid perspectives or interests. This leads to constant reassessment of rules (i.e., those of philosophy, the scientific method, etc.) according to the circumstances of individual perspectives. This view has acquired the name perspectivism .

In Thus Spoke Zarathustra Nietzsche proclaimed that a table of values hangs above every great person. He pointed out that what is common among different peoples is the act of esteeming, of creating values, even if the values are different from one person to the next. Nietzsche asserted that what made people great was not the content of their beliefs, but the act of valuing. Thus the values a community strives to articulate are not as important as the collective will to see those values come to pass. The willingness is more essential than the merit of the goal itself, according to Nietzsche. "A thousand goals have there been so far", says Zarathustra, "for there are a thousand peoples. Only the yoke for the thousand necks is still lacking: the one goal is lacking. Humanity still has no goal." Hence, the title of the aphorism, "On The Thousand And One Goal". The idea that one value-system is no more worthy than the next, although it may not be directly ascribed to Nietzsche, has become a common premise in modern social science. Max Weber and Martin Heidegger absorbed it and made it their own. It shaped their philosophical and cultural endeavours, as well as their political understanding. Weber, for example, relied on Nietzsche's perspectivism by maintaining that objectivity is still possible—but only after a particular perspective, value, or end has been established.

Among his critique of traditional philosophy of Immanuel Kant , René Descartes and Plato in Beyond Good and Evil , Nietzsche attacked the thing in itself and cogito ergo sum ("I think, therefore I am") as unfalsifiable beliefs based on naive acceptance of previous notions and fallacies . The philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre put Nietzsche in a high place in the history of philosophy. While criticising nihilism and Nietzsche together as a sign of general decay, he still commended him for recognising psychological motives behind Kant and David Hume 's moral philosophy:

For it was Nietzsche's historic achievement to understand more clearly than any other philosopher ... not only that what purported to be appeals of objectivity were in fact expressions of subjective will, but also the nature of the problems that this posed for philosophy.

In Beyond Good and Evil and On the Genealogy of Morality Nietzsche's genealogical account of the development of modern moral systems occupies a central place. For Nietzsche a fundamental shift took place during the human history from thinking in terms of "good and bad" toward "good and evil".

The initial form of morality was set by a warrior aristocracy and other ruling castes of ancient civilisations. Aristocratic values of good and bad coincided with and reflected their relationship to lower castes such as slaves. Nietzsche presented this "master morality" as the original system of morality—perhaps best associated with Homeric Greece. To be "good" was to be happy and to have the things related to happiness: wealth, strength, health, power, etc. To be "bad" was to be like the slaves over whom the aristocracy ruled: poor, weak, sick, pathetic—objects of pity or disgust rather than hatred.

"Slave morality" developed as a reaction to master morality. Value emerges from the contrast between good and evil: good being associated with other-worldliness, charity, piety, restraint, meekness, and submission; while evil is worldly, cruel, selfish, wealthy, and aggressive. Nietzsche saw slave morality as pessimistic and fearful, its values emerging to improve the self-perception of slaves. He associated slave morality with the Jewish and Christian traditions, as it is born out of the ressentiment of slaves. Nietzsche argued that the idea of equality allowed slaves to overcome their own conditions without despising themselves. By denying the inherent inequality of people—in success, strength, beauty, and intelligence—slaves acquired a method of escape, namely by generating new values on the basis of rejecting master morality. It was used as an attempt to overcome the slave's sense of inferiority before their (better-off) masters. It does so by depicting slave weakness, for example, as a matter of choice, by relabelling it as "meekness". The "good man" of master morality is precisely the "evil man" of slave morality, while the "bad man" is recast as the "good man". Slave morality, however, leads to seeing the present state of the world as unjust, and creates the need for a belief in an afterlife, where the "evil man" (the master) will be punished, while the "good man" (the slave) will be rewarded.

Nietzsche saw slave morality as a source of the nihilism that has overtaken Europe: it had led to view earthly life as inherently unfair, only justified as a prelude to the world to come; as such, the ever-increasing loss of belief in religion and Heaven had led to utter despair and pessimism. Furthermore, modern Europe and Christianity exist in a hypocritical state due to a tension between master and slave morality, both contradictory values determining, to varying degrees, the values of most Europeans (who are " motley "). Nietzsche called for exceptional people not to be ashamed in the face of a supposed morality-for-all, which he deems to be harmful to the flourishing of exceptional people. He cautioned that morality, per se, is not bad; it is good for the masses and should be left to them. Exceptional people, in contrast, should follow their own "inner law". A favourite motto of Nietzsche, taken from Pindar , reads: "Become what you are."

A long-standing assumption about Nietzsche is that he preferred master over slave morality. The eminent Nietzsche scholar Walter Kaufmann rejected this interpretation, writing that Nietzsche's analyses of these two types of morality were used only in a descriptive and historic sense; they were not meant for any kind of acceptance or glorification. On the other hand, Nietzsche called master morality "a higher order of values, the noble ones, those that say Yes to life, those that guarantee the future". Just as "there is an order of rank between man and man", there is also an order of rank "between morality and morality". Nietzsche waged a philosophic war against the slave morality of Christianity in his "revaluation of all values" to bring about the victory of a new master morality that he called the "philosophy of the future" ( Beyond Good and Evil is subtitled Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future ).

In Daybreak Nietzsche began his "Campaign against Morality". He called himself an "immoralist" and harshly criticised the prominent moral philosophies of his day: Christianity, Kantianism and utilitarianism . Nietzsche's concept " God is dead " applies to the doctrines of Christendom , though not to all other faiths: he claimed that Buddhism is a successful religion that he complimented for fostering critical thought. Still, Nietzsche saw his philosophy as a counter-movement to nihilism through appreciation of art:

Art as the single superior counterforce against all will to negation of life, art as the anti-Christian, anti-Buddhist, anti-Nihilist par excellence.

Nietzsche claimed that the Christian faith as practised was not a proper representation of Jesus' teachings, as it forced people merely to believe in the way of Jesus but not to act as Jesus did; in particular, his example of refusing to judge people, something that Christians constantly did. He condemned institutionalised Christianity for emphasising a morality of pity ( Mitleid ), which assumes an inherent illness in society:

Christianity is called the religion of pity . Pity stands opposed to the tonic emotions which heighten our vitality: it has a depressing effect. We are deprived of strength when we feel pity. That loss of strength in which suffering as such inflicts on life is still further increased and multiplied by pity. Pity makes suffering contagious.

In Ecce Homo Nietzsche called the establishment of moral systems based on a dichotomy of good and evil a "calamitous error", and wished to initiate a re-evaluation of the values of the Christian world. He indicated his desire to bring about a new, more naturalistic source of value in the vital impulses of life itself.

While Nietzsche attacked the principles of Judaism, he was not antisemitic : in his work On the Genealogy of Morality , he explicitly condemned antisemitism and pointed out that his attack on Judaism was not an attack on contemporary Jewish people but specifically an attack upon the ancient Jewish priesthood on whom he claimed antisemitic Christians paradoxically based their views.

Nietzsche felt that modern antisemitism was "despicable" and contrary to European ideals. Its cause, in his opinion, was the growth in European nationalism and the endemic "jealousy and hatred" of Jewish success. He wrote that Jews should be thanked for helping uphold a respect for the philosophies of ancient Greece, and for giving rise to "the noblest human being (Christ), the purest philosopher ( Baruch Spinoza ), the mightiest book, and the most effective moral code in the world".

Another concept important to understanding Nietzsche is the Übermensch (Superman). Writing about nihilism in Also Sprach Zarathustra , Nietzsche introduced an Übermensch . According to Laurence Lampert , "the death of God must be followed by a long twilight of piety and nihilism (II. 19; III. 8). Zarathustra's gift of the overman is given to mankind not aware of the problem to which the overman is the solution." Zarathustra presents the Übermensch as the creator of new values, and he appears as a solution to the problem of the death of God and nihilism. The Übermensch does not follow the morality of common people since that favours mediocrity but rises above the notion of good and evil and above the " herd ". In this way Zarathustra proclaims his ultimate goal as the journey towards the state of the Übermensch . He wants a kind of spiritual evolution of self-awareness and overcoming of traditional views on morality and justice that stem from the superstitious beliefs still deeply rooted or related to the notion of God and Christianity.

From Thus Spoke Zarathustra (Zarathustra's Prologue; pp. 9–11):

I teach you the Übermensch . Man is something that shall be overcome. What have you done to overcome him? All beings so far have created something beyond themselves: and you want to be the ebb of that great tide, and would rather go back to the beast than overcome man? What is the ape to man? A laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment. And just the same shall man be to the Übermensch: a laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment. You have made your way from worm to man, and much within you is still worm. Once you were apes, and even yet man is more of an ape than any ape. Even the wisest among you is only a conflict and hybrid of plant and ghost. But do I bid you become ghosts or plants? Behold, I teach you the Übermensch! The Übermensch is the meaning of the earth. Let your will say: The Übermensch shall be the meaning of the earth... Man is a rope stretched between the animal and the Übermensch—a rope over an abyss... What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal: what is lovable in man is that he is an over-going and a going under .

Zarathustra contrasts the Übermensch with the last man of egalitarian modernity (the most obvious example being democracy), an alternative goal humanity might set for itself. The last man is possible only by mankind's having bred an apathetic creature who has no great passion or commitment, who is unable to dream, who merely earns his living and keeps warm. This concept appears only in Thus Spoke Zarathustra , and is presented as a condition that would render the creation of the Übermensch impossible. [ better source needed ]

Some have suggested that the eternal return is related to the Übermensch , since willing the eternal return of the same is a necessary step if the Übermensch is to create new values untainted by the spirit of gravity or asceticism . Values involve a rank-ordering of things, and so are inseparable from approval and disapproval, yet it was dissatisfaction that prompted men to seek refuge in other-worldliness and embrace other-worldly values. It could seem that the Übermensch , in being devoted to any values at all, would necessarily fail to create values that did not share some bit of asceticism. Willing the eternal recurrence is presented as accepting the existence of the low while still recognising it as the low, and thus as overcoming the spirit of gravity or asceticism. One must have the strength of the Übermensch to will the eternal recurrence. Only the Übermensch will have the strength to fully accept all of his past life, including his failures and misdeeds, and to truly will their eternal return. This action nearly kills Zarathustra, for example, and most human beings cannot avoid other-worldliness because they really are sick, not because of any choice they made.

The Nazis attempted to incorporate the concept into their ideology by means of taking Nietzsche's figurative form of speech and creating a literal superiority over other ethnicities. After Nietzsche's death his sister, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche , became the curator and editor of his manuscripts. She reworked Nietzsche's unpublished writings to fit her own German nationalist ideology while often contradicting or obfuscating Nietzsche's stated opinions, which were explicitly opposed to antisemitism and nationalism . Through her published editions, Nietzsche's work became associated with fascism and Nazism ; 20th-century scholars contested this interpretation of his work and corrected editions of his writings were soon made available.

Although Nietzsche has been misrepresented as a predecessor to Nazism, he criticised antisemitism, pan-Germanism and, to a lesser extent, nationalism . Thus, he broke with his editor in 1886 because of his opposition to his editor's antisemitic stances, and his rupture with Richard Wagner , expressed in The Case of Wagner and Nietzsche contra Wagner , both of which he wrote in 1888, had much to do with Wagner's endorsement of pan-Germanism and antisemitism—and also of his rallying to Christianity. In a 29 March 1887 letter to Theodor Fritsch , Nietzsche mocked antisemites, Fritsch, Eugen Dühring , Wagner, Ebrard , Adolf Wahrmund , and the leading advocate of pan-Germanism, Paul de Lagarde , who would become, along with Wagner and Houston Chamberlain , the main official influences of Nazism . This 1887 letter to Fritsch ended by: "And finally, how do you think I feel when the name Zarathustra is mouthed by anti-Semites?" In contrast to these examples, Nietzsche's close friend Franz Overbeck recalled in his memoirs, "When he speaks frankly, the opinions he expresses about Jews go, in their severity, beyond any anti-Semitism. The foundation of his anti-Christianity is essentially anti-Semitic."

A basic element in Nietzsche's philosophical outlook is the "will to power" ( der Wille zur Macht ), which he maintained provides a basis for understanding human behaviour—more so than competing explanations, such as the ones based on pressure for adaptation or survival. As such, according to Nietzsche, the drive for conservation appears as the major motivator of human or animal behaviour only in exceptions, as the general condition of life is not one of a 'struggle for existence.' More often than not, self-conservation is a consequence of a creature's will to exert its strength on the outside world.

In presenting his theory of human behaviour, Nietzsche also addressed and attacked concepts from philosophies then popularly embraced, such as Schopenhauer's notion of an aimless will or that of utilitarianism . Utilitarians claim that what moves people is the desire to be happy and accumulate pleasure in their lives. But such a conception of happiness Nietzsche rejected as something limited to, and characteristic of, the bourgeois lifestyle of the English society, and instead put forth the idea that happiness is not an aim per se . It is a consequence of overcoming hurdles to one's actions and the fulfilment of the will.

Related to his theory of the will to power is his speculation, which he did not deem final, regarding the reality of the physical world, including inorganic matter—that, like man's affections and impulses, the material world is also set by the dynamics of a form of the will to power. At the core of his theory is a rejection of atomism —the idea that matter is composed of stable, indivisible units (atoms). Instead, he seemed to have accepted the conclusions of Ruđer Bošković , who explained the qualities of matter as a result of an interplay of forces. One study of Nietzsche defines his fully developed concept of the will to power as "the element from which derive both the quantitative difference of related forces and the quality that devolves into each force in this relation" revealing the will to power as "the principle of the synthesis of forces". Of such forces Nietzsche said they could perhaps be viewed as a primitive form of the will. Likewise, he rejected the view that the movement of bodies is ruled by inexorable laws of nature, positing instead that movement was governed by the power relations between bodies and forces.

Other scholars disagree that Nietzsche considered the material world to be a form of the will to power: Nietzsche thoroughly criticised metaphysics, and by including the will to power in the material world, he would simply be setting up a new metaphysics. Other than Aphorism 36 in Beyond Good and Evil , where he raised a question regarding will to power as being in the material world, they argue, it was only in his notes (unpublished by himself), where he wrote about a metaphysical will to power. And they also claim that Nietzsche directed his landlord to burn those notes in 1888 when he left Sils Maria. According to these scholars, the "burning" story supports their thesis that Nietzsche rejected his project on the will to power at the end of his lucid life. A study (Huang 2019) shows that although it is true that in 1888 Nietzsche wanted some of his notes burned, this indicates little about his project on the will to power, not only because only 11 "aphorisms" saved from the flames were ultimately incorporated into The Will to Power (this book contains 1067 "aphorisms"), but also because these abandoned notes mainly focus on topics such as the critique of morality while touching upon the "feeling of power" only once.

A trained philologist, Nietzsche had a thorough knowledge of Greek philosophy . He read Immanuel Kant , Plato , John Stuart Mill , Arthur Schopenhauer and Afrikan Spir , who became the main opponents in his philosophy, and later engaged, via the work of Kuno Fischer in particular, with the thought of Baruch Spinoza , whom he saw as his "precursor" in many respects but as a personification of the "ascetic ideal" in others. Nietzsche referred to Kant as a "moral fanatic", Plato as "boring", Mill as a "blockhead", and of Spinoza, he asked: "How much of personal timidity and vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray?" He likewise expressed contempt for the English novelist George Eliot .

Nietzsche's philosophy, while innovative and revolutionary, was indebted to many predecessors. While at Basel, Nietzsche lectured on pre-Platonic philosophers for several years, and the text of this lecture series has been characterised as a "lost link" in the development of his thought. "In it, concepts such as the will to power, the eternal return of the same, the overman, gay science, self-overcoming and so on receive rough, unnamed formulations and are linked to specific pre-Platonic, especially Heraclitus, who emerges as a pre-Platonic Nietzsche." The pre-Socratic philosopher Heraclitus was known for rejecting the concept of being as a constant and eternal principle of the universe and embracing "flux" and incessant change. His symbolism of the world as "child play" marked by amoral spontaneity and lack of definite rules was appreciated by Nietzsche. Due to his Heraclitean sympathies, Nietzsche was also a vociferous critic of Parmenides , who, in contrast to Heraclitus, viewed the world as a single, unchanging Being.

In his Egotism in German Philosophy the philosopher George Santayana claimed that Nietzsche's whole philosophy was a reaction to Schopenhauer. Santayana wrote that Nietzsche's work was "an emendation of that of Schopenhauer. The will to live would become the will to dominate; pessimism founded on reflection would become optimism founded on courage; the suspense of the will in contemplation would yield to a more biological account of intelligence and taste; finally in the place of pity and asceticism (Schopenhauer's two principles of morals) Nietzsche would set up the duty of asserting the will at all costs and being cruelly but beautifully strong. These points of difference from Schopenhauer cover the whole philosophy of Nietzsche."

The superficial similarity of Nietzsche's Übermensch to Thomas Carlyle 's Hero as well as both authors' rhetorical prose style has led to speculation concerning the degree to which Nietzsche might have been influenced by his reading of Carlyle. G. K. Chesterton believed that "Out of [Carlyle] flows most of the philosophy of Nietzsche", qualifying his statement by adding that they were "profoundly different" in character. Ruth apRoberts has shown that Carlyle anticipated Nietzsche in asserting the importance of metaphor (with Nietzsche's metaphor-fiction theory "appear[ing] to owe something to Carlyle"), announcing the death of God, and recognising both Goethe's Entsagen (renunciation) and Novalis 's Selbsttödtung (self-annihilation) as prerequisites for engaging in philosophy. apRoberts writes that "Nietzsche and Carlyle had the same German sources, but Nietzsche may owe more to Carlyle than he cares to admit", noting that "[Nietzsche] takes the trouble to repudiate Carlyle with malicious emphasis." Ralph Jessop, senior lecturer at the University of Glasgow , argues a reassessment of Carlyle's influence on Nietzsche is "long-overdue".

Nietzsche expressed admiration for 17th-century French moralists such as François de La Rochefoucauld , Jean de La Bruyère and Luc de Clapiers, marquis de Vauvenargues , as well as for Stendhal . The organicism of Paul Bourget influenced Nietzsche, as did that of Rudolf Virchow and Alfred Espinas . In 1867 Nietzsche wrote in a letter that he was trying to improve his German style of writing with the help of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing , Georg Christoph Lichtenberg and Schopenhauer. It was probably Lichtenberg (along with Paul Rée ) whose aphoristic style of writing contributed to Nietzsche's own use of aphorism . Nietzsche early learned of Darwinism through Friedrich Albert Lange . The essays of Ralph Waldo Emerson had a profound influence on Nietzsche, who "loved Emerson from first to last", wrote "Never have I felt so much at home in a book", and called him "[the] author who has been richest in ideas in this century so far". Hippolyte Taine influenced Nietzsche's view on Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Napoleon . Notably, he also read some of the posthumous works of Charles Baudelaire , Leo Tolstoy 's My Religion , Ernest Renan 's Life of Jesus , and Fyodor Dostoevsky 's Demons . Nietzsche called Dostoevsky "the only psychologist from whom I have anything to learn". While Nietzsche never mentions Max Stirner , the similarities in their ideas have prompted a minority of interpreters to suggest a relationship between the two .

In 1861 Nietzsche wrote an enthusiastic essay on his "favourite poet", Friedrich Hölderlin , mostly forgotten at that time. He also expressed deep appreciation for Adalbert Stifter 's Indian Summer , Lord Byron 's Manfred and Mark Twain 's Tom Sawyer .

A translation by Louis Jacolliot of the Calcutta version of the ancient Hindu text the Manusmriti was reviewed by Nietzsche. He commented on it both favourably and unfavourably:

Nietzsche's works did not reach a wide readership during his active writing career. In 1888 the influential Danish critic Georg Brandes aroused considerable excitement about Nietzsche through a series of lectures he gave at the University of Copenhagen . In the years after Nietzsche's death in 1900, his works became better known, and readers have responded to them in complex and sometimes controversial ways. Many Germans eventually discovered his appeals for greater individualism and personality development in Thus Spoke Zarathustra , but responded to them divergently. He had some following among left-wing Germans in the 1890s; in 1894–1895 German conservatives wanted to ban his work as subversive . During the late 19th century Nietzsche's ideas were commonly associated with anarchist movements and appear to have had influence within them, particularly in France, Germany, Britain and the United States. Gustav Landauer is credited with the most in-depth appreciation and critique of Nietzsche's ideas from an anarchist perspective. H. L. Mencken produced the first book on Nietzsche in English in 1907, The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche , and in 1910 a book of translated paragraphs from Nietzsche, increasing knowledge of his philosophy in the United States. Nietzsche is known today as a precursor to existentialism , post-structuralism and postmodernism , while sociologists such as Jack Fong and Anas Karzai make visible Nietzsche's sociological breadth. W. B. Yeats and Arthur Symons described Nietzsche as the intellectual heir to William Blake . Symons went on to compare the ideas of the two thinkers in The Symbolist Movement in Literature , while Yeats tried to raise awareness of Nietzsche in Ireland. A similar notion was espoused by W. H. Auden who wrote of Nietzsche in his New Year Letter (released in 1941 in The Double Man ): "O masterly debunker of our liberal fallacies ... all your life you stormed, like your English forerunner Blake." Nietzsche made an impact on composers during the 1890s. The writer Donald Mitchell noted that Gustav Mahler was "attracted to the poetic fire of Zarathustra, but repelled by the intellectual core of its writings". He also quoted Mahler himself, and adds that he was influenced by Nietzsche's conception and affirmative approach to nature, which Mahler presented in his Third Symphony using Zarathustra's roundelay . Frederick Delius produced a piece of choral music, A Mass of Life , based on a text of Thus Spoke Zarathustra , while Richard Strauss (who also based his Also sprach Zarathustra on the same book), was only interested in finishing "another chapter of symphonic autobiography". Writers and poets influenced by Nietzsche include André Gide , August Strindberg , Robinson Jeffers , Pío Baroja , D. H. Lawrence , Edith Södergran and Yukio Mishima .

Nietzsche was an early influence on the poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke . Knut Hamsun counted Nietzsche, along with Strindberg and Dostoyevsky, as his primary influences. The author Jack London wrote that he was more stimulated by Nietzsche than by any other writer. Critics have suggested that the character of David Grief in A Son of the Sun was based on Nietzsche. Nietzsche's influence on Muhammad Iqbal is most evidenced in Asrar-i Khudi ( The Secrets of the Self ). Wallace Stevens was another reader of Nietzsche, and elements of Nietzsche's philosophy were found throughout Stevens's poetry collection Harmonium . Olaf Stapledon was influenced by the idea of the Übermensch and it is a central theme in his books Odd John and Sirius . In Russia, Nietzsche influenced Russian symbolism and figures such as Dmitry Merezhkovsky , Andrei Bely , Vyacheslav Ivanov and Alexander Scriabin incorporated or discussed parts of Nietzsche philosophy in their works. Thomas Mann 's novel Death in Venice shows a use of Apollonian and Dionysian, and in Doctor Faustus Nietzsche was a central source for the character of Adrian Leverkühn. Hermann Hesse , similarly, in his Narcissus and Goldmund presents two main characters as opposite yet intertwined Apollonian and Dionysian spirits. The painter Giovanni Segantini was fascinated by Thus Spoke Zarathustra , and he drew an illustration for the first Italian translation of the book. The Russian painter Lena Hades created the oil painting cycle Also Sprach Zarathustra dedicated to the book Thus Spoke Zarathustra .

By the time of the First World War Nietzsche had acquired a reputation as an inspiration for right-wing German militarism and leftist politics. German soldiers received copies of Thus Spoke Zarathustra as gifts during World War I. The Dreyfus affair provided a contrasting example of his reception: the French antisemitic Right labelled the Jewish and leftist intellectuals who defended Alfred Dreyfus as "Nietzscheans". Nietzsche had a distinct appeal for many Zionist thinkers around the start of the 20th century, most notable being Ahad Ha'am , Hillel Zeitlin , Micha Josef Berdyczewski , A.D. Gordon and Martin Buber , who went so far as to extol Nietzsche as a "creator" and "emissary of life". Chaim Weizmann , the first president of Israel , was a great admirer of Nietzsche; he sent Nietzsche's books to his wife, adding a comment in a letter that "This was the best and finest thing I can send to you." Israel Eldad , the ideological chief of the Stern Gang that fought the British in Palestine in the 1940s, wrote about Nietzsche in his underground newspaper and later translated most of Nietzsche's books into Hebrew . Eugene O'Neill remarked that Zarathustra influenced him more than any other book he ever read. He also shared Nietzsche's view of tragedy . The plays The Great God Brown and Lazarus Laughed are examples of Nietzsche's influence on him. The First International claimed Nietzsche as ideologically one of their own. From 1888 through the 1890s there were more publications of Nietzsche works in Russia than in any other country. Nietzsche was influential among the Bolsheviks. Among the Nietzschean Bolsheviks were Vladimir Bazarov , Anatoly Lunacharsky and Aleksandr Bogdanov . Nietzsche's influence on the works of the Frankfurt School philosophers Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno can be seen in the Dialectic of Enlightenment . Adorno encapsulated Nietzsche's philosophy as expressing the "humane in a world in which humanity has become a sham".

Nietzsche's growing prominence suffered a severe setback when his works became closely associated with Adolf Hitler and Nazi Germany . Many political leaders of the twentieth century were at least superficially familiar with Nietzsche's ideas, although it is not always possible to determine whether they actually read his work. It is debated among scholars whether Hitler read Nietzsche, although if he did, it may not have been extensively. He was a frequent visitor to the Nietzsche museum in Weimar and used expressions of Nietzsche's, such as "lords of the earth" in Mein Kampf . The Nazis made selective use of Nietzsche's philosophy. Alfred Baeumler was perhaps the most notable exponent of Nietzschean thought in Nazi Germany. Baeumler had published his book "Nietzsche, Philosopher and Politician" in 1931, before the Nazis' rise to power, and subsequently published several editions of Nietzsche's work during the Third Reich. Benito Mussolini , Charles de Gaulle and Huey P. Newton read Nietzsche. Richard Nixon , the 37th president of the United States , read Nietzsche with "curious interest", and his book Beyond Peace might have taken its title from Nietzsche's book Beyond Good and Evil , which Nixon read beforehand. Bertrand Russell wrote that Nietzsche had exerted great influence on philosophers and on people of literary and artistic culture, but warned that the attempt to put Nietzsche's philosophy of aristocracy into practice could only be done by an organisation similar to the Fascist or the Nazi Party.

A decade after the Second World War there was a revival of Nietzsche's philosophical writings thanks to translations and analyses by Walter Kaufmann and R.J. Hollingdale . Georges Bataille was also influential in this revival, defending Nietzsche against appropriation by the Nazis with his notable 1937 essay "Nietzsche and Fascists". Others, well known philosophers in their own right, wrote commentaries on Nietzsche's philosophy, including Martin Heidegger , who produced a four-volume study, and Lev Shestov , who wrote a book called Dostoyevski, Tolstoy and Nietzsche , in which he portrays Nietzsche and Dostoevsky as the "thinkers of tragedy". Georg Simmel compares Nietzsche's importance to ethics to that of Nicolaus Copernicus for cosmology . The sociologist Ferdinand Tönnies read Nietzsche avidly from his early life, and later frequently discussed many of his concepts in his own works. Nietzsche has influenced philosophers such as Martin Heidegger , Jean-Paul Sartre , Oswald Spengler , George Grant , Emil Cioran , Albert Camus , Ayn Rand , Jacques Derrida , Sarah Kofman , Leo Strauss , Max Scheler , Michel Foucault , Bernard Williams and Nick Land .

Camus described Nietzsche as "the only artist to have derived the extreme consequences of an aesthetics of the absurd ". Paul Ricœur called Nietzsche one of the masters of the "school of suspicion", alongside Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud. Carl Jung was also influenced by Nietzsche. In Memories, Dreams, Reflections , a biography transcribed by his secretary, he cites Nietzsche as a large influence. Aspects of Nietzsche's philosophy, especially his ideas of the self and his relation to society, run through much of late-twentieth and early twenty-first century thought. Nietzsche's writings have also been influential to some advancers of Accelerationist thought through his influence on Deleuze and Guattari . His deepening of the romantic-heroic tradition of the nineteenth century, for example, as expressed in the ideal of the "grand striver" appears in the work of thinkers from Cornelius Castoriadis to Roberto Mangabeira Unger . For Nietzsche, this grand striver overcomes obstacles, engages in epic struggles, pursues new goals, embraces recurrent novelty, and transcends existing structures and contexts.Other reasons this message may be displayed:Other reasons this message may be displayed:

The Nissan Leaf ( Japanese : 日産・リーフ , Hepburn : Nissan Rīfu ; stylized as LEAF ) is a battery electric car produced by Nissan since 2010. It was offered exclusively as a 5-door hatchback until 2025, when it became a crossover SUV model. The term "LEAF" serves as a backronym to leading environmentally-friendly affordable family car .

The Leaf was unveiled on 1 August 2009 as the world's first mass market electric and zero-emission vehicle. Among other awards and recognition, it received the 2010 Green Car Vision Award , the 2011 European Car of the Year , the 2011 World Car of the Year , and the 2011–2012 Car of the Year Japan . The Leaf's range on a full charge has been steadily increased from 117 km (73 miles) to 364 km (226 miles) ( EPA rated) by the use of larger battery packs and several minor improvements.

As of September 2021 [ update ] , European sales totalled more than 208,000, and as of December 2021 [ update ] , over 165,000 had been sold in the U.S., and 157,000 in Japan. Global sales across both generations totalled 577,000 by February 2022. The Leaf was the world's all-time top selling plug-in electric car until it was surpassed in early 2020 by the Tesla Model 3 .



The first generation Nissan Leaf was in production from 2010 to 2017. It was unveiled on 1 August 2009 as the world's first series produced battery electric vehicle . Before it officially commenced production, Nissan developed three prototype battery electric vehicles—dubbed the EV-01, EV-02 and EV-11. The former two were based on the Z11 Nissan Cube while the latter was based on the C11 Nissan Tiida .

The Leaf production began on 22 October 2010 at the Oppama facility in Yokosuka , Kanagawa . Until early 2013, models sold in Europe and the US were imported from the Oppama plant adapted stylistically for the respective markets. On 12 December 2012, battery manufacturing began at the Smyrna plant, with official production of the Leaf initiating on 9 January 2013. Manufacturing in the UK began on 28 March 2013.

Initially, the Leaf was available exclusively with a large battery pack composed of 192 flat, laminated lithium-ion cells developed in collaboration with NEC , which offers advantages such as simplified design, efficient cooling, and optimal packaging. The battery pack is located under the floor and between the wheels, optimising the vehicle's handling and interior space. The electric motor produces 80 kW (110 hp) of power with a range of about 160 km (100 miles) when the battery is fully charged. Recharging can take 16 hours on 120 V or 8 hours on 230 V power. Fast charging is also available with a specific charger, which can restore 80% of the battery capacity in approximately 30 minutes.

The first generation Leaf garnered both acclaim and criticism from multiple automotive critics. Car and Driver , an American automotive magazine, expressed unfavourable opinions about the inexpensive materials used in the vehicle, asserting that they seem more fitting for a car priced at half its actual cost. However, they commended the Leaf for its spacious boot, along with features like standard heated seats and, in higher-end models, a heated steering wheel and leather seats. Opinions on the battery performance and safety aspects vary, with some finding the battery and range underwhelming and others expressing concerns about safety levels.

In October 2017, for the 2018 model year, Nissan launched the new generation Leaf in Japan, and deliveries in North America and Europe began in February 2018. In 2018, global sales reached a record level of 87,149 units, third behind the Tesla Model 3 and the BAIC EC-Series .

Mechanically, the second generation Leaf is similar to the first, while adding more range, and more power, while departing stylistically. The interior adds Android Auto & Apple CarPlay .

With a 40 kWh battery pack (39 kWh usable) with an EPA-rated range of 243 km (151 miles) , The electric motor produces 110 kW (147 hp) and 320 N⋅m (236 lb⋅ft) of torque. the Leaf charges through either a 6.6 kW regular plug ( SAE J1772 in US/Japan, or a Type 2 connector in EU countries) or a 50 kW CHAdeMO , and has the ability to send power back to the grid .

Propilot Assist, a lane centering system, is optional on the two highest trims, with automatic parking in some markets. The Leaf offers one-pedal braking where easing off the accelerator pedal engages significant regenerative braking, able to completely stop without engaging the brake pedal, at which point hydraulic brakes are automatically applied, to hold the vehicle in position.

From 2019, a Leaf e+ (Leaf Plus in North America) variant was offered with a larger 62 kWh battery (59 kWh usable) providing an EPA range of 364 km (226 miles) , and a new 160 kW motor. It can use CHAdeMO chargers up to 100 kW.

In September 2020, Nissan presented a novel UK prototype emergency services version of the Leaf for natural disaster response, dubbed the RE-LEAF, based on the 62 kWh LEAF e+ (sold in the U.S. as the Plus). The working concept vehicle is ruggedized with an elevated ride height of 70 mm (2.8 in) , underbody protection and all-terrain tires on motorsport wheels. It is intended to serve as a reliable mobile power source for a small command center, offering weatherproof external power outlets for site lighting, tools or emergency medical equipment. Other modifications include a cargo area in place of the rear seats, separated from the passenger area by a cage, a rear hatch area that opens to a workstation area with pull-out computer desk and 810 mm (32 in) LCD monitor, and roof-mounted emergency lights. While there was no word of an actual production version, the concept was well received in the automotive, EV and tech media.

In June 2022, the Leaf received a facelift for the 2023 model year. In the US, the EPA range was slightly reduced to 240 km (149 miles) for the 40 kWh version and 341 km (212 miles) for the 62 kWh version.

Initially, the Japanese-spec Leaf are offered in 3 trim: S, X, and G.

In 2018, the Nismo Variant was released. The exterior features a more sportier design, and the aluminium wheels have been changed to a special 18-inch size that is larger in diameter, lighter, and has reduced air resistance on the wheel surface. The body colour is available in nine variations, including two two-tone colours with the specially offered "Super Black."

In January 2019, the enlarged battery e+ (e-Plus) was added. It was equipped with a 62 kWh battery. It was offered in 2 grades: e+ X, and e+ G.

Like most other Nissan models in Japan, the Autech was added in May 2019. It was available in all e+ variants.

European Leafs are offered in the following trim lines: Visia, Acenta, N-Connecta, and Tekna.

The N-Connecta adds from Acenta an intelligent around view monitor with moving object detection and front and rear parking sensors, part synthetic leather and cloth trim, heat pack with heated seats and heated steering wheel, 43 centimetre (17 inch) alloy wheels, and privacy glass.

Tekna adds from N-Connecta ProPILOT Advanced Driver Assistance System, Bose speakers, part leather seats with Ultrasuede trim, LED fog lamps with cornering function, and electronic parking brake.

The North American Leafs were initially sold in S, SV and SL trim lines. In 2018, for the 2019 model year, the S Plus, SV Plus, and SL Plus trims were added. The S and SV trim levels can be had with either the Leaf or Leaf Plus battery pack. The SL is only available in the Leaf Plus configuration.

The Mexican model arrived on 24 August 2018 as a 2019 model, and was offered in S, SL, and SL Bitono trim lines.

In celebration of World EV Day , 9 September 2020, Nissan marked the production of the 500,000th LEAF.

UK production ceased in March 2024, after 270,000 units produced in Sunderland plant, both generations included.

The Leaf was chosen as one of the Top 10 Tech Cars by the US IEEE in 2018.

In 2022, the Leaf was chosen as the 'Best Family Electric Car' at the UK Carbuyer’s Best Used Car Awards.

The second-generation Leaf RC was unveiled on 30 November 2018. A total of 6 units of Leaf Nismo RCs were allocated for promotional purposes.

The second-generation Leaf Nismo RC is more aerodynamic due to the increased body size, resulting in a higher drag coefficient (Cd). The lift-to-drag ratio has improved by about 40%, and front downforce has increased by 54%. According to Motohiro Matsumura, the previous model was rear-heavy because the rear was made of steel despite its low ride height. The weight has been improved by changing the entire body to a CFRP monocoque body, and the subframe has been made 25% lighter than the steel. The roll cage has been reinforced by wrapping CFRP around steel pipes, which has also contributed to reducing its size and weight.

While the design is characteristic of a race car, it shares many similarities with the regular Leaf. The headlights, V-motion grille, and front and rear windows are almost the same shape, but it is distinguished by its long bonnet, large rear wing, and large wings.

The third-generation Leaf was previewed as the Nissan Chill-Out concept on 29 November 2021. Nissan began to release details of the third-generation Leaf in March 2025. It was unveiled on 17 June 2025, with substantial updates to its design, platform, and performance. The model was released later that year. Departing from its previous hatchback form, the new Leaf  adopted a subcompact crossover -style body built on the AmpR Medium (previously known as CMF-EV) platform, shared with the larger Nissan Ariya compact crossover. Significantly, the new Leaf is available with active liquid-cooled battery packs for the first time, rather than the passive air-cooled packs used in previous versions. The new Leaf retains a single-motor, front-wheel-drive layout but does not offer dual-motor, all-wheel-drive unlike the Ariya. Availability has been confirmed for North America, Europe, Japan, and Australia.

Nissan has stated that the vehicle offers "significant range improvements," with an estimated driving range of 490 km (303 miles) (EPA) on select configurations—compared to the previous model’s EPA-rated range of 240 to 341 km (149 to 212 miles) . Nissan claims the European version has a range of 211 miles (340 km) at a steady speed of 129 km/h (80 mph) . The Leaf also supports a faster charging rate of 150 kW and is the first Nissan vehicle to adopt the North American Charging System (NACS), making it compatible with the Tesla Supercharger network. In North America, the driver's side front wing contains a J1772 port (without CCS) for up to Level 2 charging, while the NACS port is located on the passenger side front wing. In North America, Nissan claims the battery can charge from 10 – 80% in 35 minutes when DC fast charging, or about 30 minutes for the European version. It has a lower C d =0.25 (0.26 in North America) compared to the previous generation's 0.29.

Two liquid-cooled NMC lithium-ion battery options are available, both of which offer thermal conditioning functionality. The 52 kWh battery is paired with a motor outputting 130 kW (174 hp) and 344 N⋅m (254 lb⋅ft) of torque. The 75 kWh battery is paired with a 160 kW (214 hp) motor with 354 N⋅m (261 lb⋅ft) of torque.

The Mitsubishi Eclipse Sportback was unveiled on 9 June 2026 in North America. The Eclipse Sportback is based on the Nissan Leaf, but with a slightly different front fascia.

Sales will begin in the fall of the same year.

Exclusive to the Japanese market, the Nismo trim level was added in July 2026. It was offered in both the B5 and B7 variants. This Nismo Leaf has unique wheels, stiffer suspension, and new aerodynamic aids. The Recaro seat option is available on the B7 grade. The electric motors are tuned for acceleration, but maximum power was not increased.

The production version was unveiled in August 2009. After receiving 20,000 pre-orders in the United States, Nissan stopped taking reservations in the United States until early 2011. Production in Japan started in October 2010, and delivery in the US and Japan began in December, with deliveries in other markets beginning in early 2012. By December 2020 the Leaf was sold in 59 markets around the world.

The Leaf was the world's best selling electric car from 2011 to 2014 and 2016. Sales fell in 2015 with overall sales led by the Tesla Model S . As of December 2019 [ update ] , the Leaf listed as the world's all-time best selling plug-in electric car . By early 2020, the Tesla Model 3 surpassed the Leaf to become the new best selling electric car in history.

By February 2022, global Leaf deliveries totaled 577,000 cars. As of September 2021 [ update ] , Europe was listed as the biggest market with more than 208,000 units sold, of which 72,620 units had been registered in Norway, the leading European national market. As of December 2021 [ update ] , U.S. sales totaled 165,710 units through December 2021, and 157,059 units in Japan.

The Nissan Leaf is the subject of Roger McGough 's poem "Ode to the Leaf", from his 2012 collection As Far as I Know .Other reasons this message may be displayed:

UBS Group AG (stylized simply as UBS ) is a Swiss multinational investment bank and financial services firm founded and based in Switzerland, with headquarters in both Zurich and Basel . It holds a strong foothold in all major financial centres as the largest Swiss banking institution and the world's largest private bank . UBS manages the largest amount of private wealth in the world, counting approximately half of The World's Billionaires among its clients, with over US$7 trillion in assets as of December 2025 (AUM). Based on international deal flow and political influence, the firm is considered one of the "biggest, most powerful financial institutions in the world". UBS is also a leading market maker and one of the eight global ' bulge bracket ' investment banks. Due to its large presence across the Americas, EMEA and Asia–Pacific markets, the Financial Stability Board considers it a global systemically important bank and UBS is widely considered to be the largest and most sophisticated "truly global investment bank" in the world, given its market-leading positions in every major financial centre globally.

UBS investment bankers and private bankers are known for their strict bank–client confidentiality and culture of banking secrecy . Apart from private banking, UBS provides wealth management , asset management and investment banking services for private, corporate and institutional clients with international service. The bank also maintains numerous underground bank vaults , bunkers and storage facilities for gold bars around the Swiss Alps and internationally. UBS acquired rival Credit Suisse in an emergency rescue deal brokered by the Swiss government and its Central bank in 2023, following which UBS' AUM increased to over $5 trillion along with an increased balanced sheet of $1.6 trillion.

In June 2017, its return on invested capital was 11.1%, followed by Goldman Sachs ' 9.35%, and JPMorgan Chase 's 9.456%. The company's capital strength, security protocols, and reputation for discretion have yielded a substantial market share in banking and a high level of brand loyalty . Alternatively, it receives routine criticism for facilitating tax noncompliance and off-shore financing . Partly due to its banking secrecy, it has also been at the centre of numerous tax avoidance investigations undertaken by U.S., French, German, Israeli and Belgian authorities. UBS operations in Switzerland and the United States were respectively ranked first and second on the 2018 Financial Secrecy Index . UBS is a primary dealer and Forex counterparty of the U.S. Federal Reserve .

UBS is a joint-stock company ( Aktiengesellschaft ), pursuant to Swiss laws. Its shares are listed at the SIX Swiss Exchange and the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). As of December 2020, UBS is present in all major financial centres worldwide, such as New York, London, Zürich, Berlin, Sydney, and Singapore. UBS has offices in 50 countries, with about 30% of its approximately 73,000 employees working in the Americas, 30% in Switzerland, 19% in Europe (excluding Switzerland), the Middle East and Africa and 21% in the Asia Pacific region. The bank has a major presence in the United States. Its American headquarters for investment banking are located in New York City, and for private wealth management advisory in Weehawken, New Jersey . They have sales & trading , along with private wealth management offices in Stamford, Connecticut . [ citation needed ]

The company's global business groups provide services that entail: global wealth management , investment banking , asset management and personal & corporate banking . UBS is the leading provider of retail banking and commercial banking services in Switzerland, and they have been on top of the Swiss market since in 2009. Looking holistically, UBS' overall invested assets is $3.101 billion, shareholders' equity is $52.928 billion and market capitalization is $45.907 billion at the end of the year 2018. In November 2014, the shares in UBS Group AG were listed and started trading as a new holding company at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the SIX Swiss Exchange. Upon application and with effect as of 14 January 2015, the shares of UBS AG, a subsidiary of the UBS Group AG, were delisted from the NYSE. As of September 2019, the largest institutional shareholders are:

As of 31 December 2024, the geographical distribution of the shareholders presents itself as follows:

As of June 2018, UBS's corporate structure includes four divisions in total, namely:

Starting on 9 June 2003, all UBS business groups, including UBS Paine Webber and UBS Warburg, were rebranded under the UBS moniker following company's start of operations as a unified global entity.

UBS's global wealth management advisory division offers high-net-worth individuals around the world a range of advisory and investment products and services. As of the end of 2016, UBS Wealth Management's invested assets totalled CHF 977billion. The whole companies assets under management (AUM) amounted to US$1,737.5 billion in 2015, representing a 1% decrease in AUM compared to the equivalent data of 2014. As of 2018, UBS manages the largest amount of private wealth in the world, counting approximately half of The World's Billionaires among its clients. More than 60% of total invested assets in UBS Wealth Management belong to individuals with a net worth of CHF 10 million or more. Of the remaining 40% of total invested assets, 30% of the total belong to individuals with net worth between CHF 1 million and CHF 10 million and the last 10% of total assets belong to individuals with a net worth of less than CHF 1 million.

UBS offers brokerage services and products as well as asset management and other investment advisory and portfolio management products and services. Additionally, UBS provides a broad range of securities and savings products that are supported by the firm's underwriting and research activities as well as clients' orders management and execution and also clearing services for transactions originated by individual investors. The business is further divided geographically with separate businesses focused on the U.S. and other international markets. Two-thirds of the total invested assets come from Europe and Switzerland, with the final third coming mainly from the Asia-Pacific region.

With its headquarters in Switzerland, UBS Wealth Management is present in more than 40 countries with approximately 190 offices (100 of which are in Switzerland). As of the end of 2018, around 23,600 people worldwide were employed by Global Wealth Management. In Switzerland, UBS Swiss Bank provides a complete set of retail banking services that includes chequing , savings , credit cards, and mortgage products for individuals. They offer cash management and commercial banking services for small businesses and corporate clients as well.

UBS global wealth management advisory operations in the Americas consists of U.S. and Canadian wealth management businesses, as well as international business booked in the U.S. UBS Wealth Management in the U.S. is an outgrowth of the former Paine Webber brokerage business. The business was initially renamed UBS Paine Webber in March 2001, after it was acquired by UBS. The division offers wealth management advice for ultra-high net worth and high net worth clients. UBS was named "Best Bank for Wealth Management in North America" at the Euromoney Awards for Excellence 2017.

In January 2026, it was announced that UBS began leasing 26,000 square feet of office space in Dallas , Texas to launch its UBS Wealth Advice Center hub.

In 2026, UBS was charged for repeatedly laundering money through one of its US subsidiaries and fined $125 million by FinCEN .

UBS's main competitors in this division are Bank of America , Morgan Stanley , JP Morgan Chase , Wells Fargo and Charles Schwab .

UBS's Personal & Corporate Banking division delivers financial products and services to retail, corporate and institutional clients in Switzerland. It also provides stable and substantial profits for the Group and revenue opportunities for businesses within the bank. UBS maintains a leading position in the retail and corporate loan market in Switzerland; in fact, it serves one in three pension funds , more than 85% of the 1,000 largest Swiss corporations and 85% of banks that resides within the nation. In 2015, 2017 and 2018, the international financial magazine Euromoney named UBS "Best Domestic Cash Manager Switzerland". As of 31 December 2018, its lending portfolio reached US$131 billion (~$ 161 billion in 2024 ).

The products that this UBS division offers range from cash accounts , payments, savings and retirement plans to investment fund products, residential mortgages and advisory services. This business division constitutes a central building block of UBS's universal bank delivery model in Switzerland and it supports other divisions, such as Investment Bank, by referring clients to them and by assisting them to build their wealth to a level at which they can be transferred to UBS Wealth Management. The retail and corporate distribution network comprises not only 279 branches in Switzerland, but 1,250 teller machines and self-service terminals, as well as digital banking services, serving 2.5 million personal banking clients.

UBS Asset Management offers equity, fixed income , currency, hedge fund , global real estate, infrastructure and private equity investment capabilities that can also be combined in multi-asset strategies. The 1998 UBS-SBC merger and subsequent restructuring resulted in the combination of three major asset management operations: UBS Asset Management, Phillips & Drew (owned by Union Bank of Switzerland ), and Brinson Partners (owned by SBC). The investment teams were merged in 2000 and in 2002 the brands were consolidated to become UBS Global Asset Management .

At the end of December 2018, UBS Asset Management was responsible for US$781 billion of invested assets and the assets under administration were US$413 billion. With around 2,300 employees in 23 countries, UBS Asset Management is the largest mutual fund manager in Switzerland, a leading fund house in Europe, and one of the largest hedge funds and real estate investment managers in the world. It has main offices in Chicago, Hong Kong, London, New York City, Singapore, Sydney , Tokyo, and Zürich . With the aim to generate systematic products and services for clients, in 2017, UBS integrated Equities, Fixed Income and Solutions capabilities and hedge funds business within a new area named Investments. UBS also formed a new area of business named Real Estate and Private Markets by combining their Global Real Estate and Infrastructure and Private Equity businesses.

In February 2017, UBS Group AG and the Northern Trust Corporation , an American international financial services company, announced an agreement for the acquisition of UBS Asset Management's fund administration servicing units in Luxembourg and Switzerland. This acquisition will facilitate the expansion of the Northern Trust Corporation into these two countries, turning the American company into the major fund administrator in the local markets and into one of the ten global leaders in the sector. At the end of the transaction, completed in October 2017, the American company will administrate a total of CHF 420 billion in assets. UBS Asset Management will continue anyway to offer Management Company, White Labelling and Representative Services to its clients. Ulrich Körner , president of the UBS Asset Management, affirms that the continuous transformation of its platform is due to a major efficiency, effectiveness and geographical dislocation of the services offered by the bank.

UBS's main competitors in this division are BlackRock , Vanguard Group , State Street Global Advisers (SSGA), Fidelity Investments and Allianz Asset Management (AAM).

In April 2025, UBS Asset Management, which oversees $1.8 trillion in assets, has removed restrictions on some of its sustainability funds investing in manufacturers of conventional weapons. This marks a shift in European asset management, as investors respond to rising geopolitical tensions and a regional push for rearmament. UBS still maintains bans on controversial weapons like cluster munitions and biological arms but gave no explanation for lifting the conventional weapons ban. The trend reflects growing investor enthusiasm to support Europe's defense buildup, particularly amidst pressure from U.S. government and rising military spending across the continent. As a result, defense stocks have surged in value.

UBS Investment Bank provides services covering securities, other financial products, and research in equities , rates, credit , foreign exchange , precious metals and derivatives . As of the end of December 2018, the personnel employed at UBS Investment Bank totalled 5,205, present in 33 countries (with principal offices in Chicago, Frankfurt, Hong Kong, London, New York, Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo and Zurich). This business division also advises and provides access to capital markets for corporate and institutional clients, governments, financial intermediaries, alternative asset managers, and private investors. UBS Investment Bank was formerly known as UBS Warburg and as Warburg Dillon Read , before the merger of the Union Bank of Switzerland and the Swiss Bank Corporation (SBC). Within the UBS Investment Bank division, the Investment Banking Department (IBD) provides a range of advisory and underwriting services including mergers and acquisitions , restructuring , equity offerings , investment grade and high yield debt offerings, leveraged finance and leveraged loan structuring, and the private placement of equity , debt , and derivatives .

The Sales & Trading division comprises equities (brokering, dealing , market making and engaging in proprietary trading in equities , equity-related products, equity derivatives , and structured products ) and FX, Rates and Credit (FRC) (brokering, dealing , market making and engaging in proprietary trading in interest rate products, credit products, mortgage-backed securities , leveraged loans , investment grade and high-yield debt , currencies , structured products , and derivative products ). Following an expansion in 2002, the trading floor covers 9,600-square-metre (103,000 sq ft) with 12-metre (40 ft) arched ceilings. Over US$1 trillion in assets are traded here every trading day. In June 2011, it was announced that UBS was considering moving its North American headquarters back to New York City, and that the bank was looking for office spaces in Midtown and in the rebuilt World Trade Center .

UBS's main competitors in this division are fellow members of the Bulge Bracket , particularly Goldman Sachs , JPMorgan Chase , and Bank of America . The American division also offers its own credit card not sponsored by another bank unlike many of its competitors.

On a global scale, UBS competes with the largest global investment banks , particularly within the Bulge Bracket . and until acquiring Credit Suisse in 2023 was regularly compared against it. According to a 2018 study published by Coalition Research Institute, UBS was among the top 10 of the world's investment banks.

UBS was founded in 1862 as the Bank in Winterthur . The Bank in Winterthur came with the movement that founded multiple Suisse Grossbanken (Swiss big banks) that occurred in the latter sector of the 19th century. The name of the bank was derived from the town of Winterthur , which served as Switzerland's industrial hub in the 19th century. By 1854, six private bankers in Basel founded the Swiss Bank Corporation (SBC) to cater to the increasing credit needs of Swiss railroad and manufacturing companies. It formed a private banking syndicate that expanded, aided by Switzerland's international neutrality . [ citation needed ]

In 1912, the Bank of Winterthur merged with Toggenburger Bank to form the Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) and grew rapidly after the Banking Law of 1934 codified Swiss banking secrecy. Following decades of market competition between Union Bank of Switzerland and the Swiss Bank Corporation (SBC), the two merged in 1998 to create a single company known solely as "UBS".
The agreement to merge had been made the previous year at a meeting of the Institut International d’Etudes Bancaires , a secretive club for European banking CEOs.

When Union Bank and SBC merged, officials originally wanted to name the merged company the "United Bank of Switzerland," but opted to call it simply UBS because of a name clash with the separate Swiss company United Bank Switzerland – a part of the United Bank Limited 's Swiss subsidiary.
UBS is no longer an acronym for Union Bank of Switzerland, but is the company's brand, just like other prominent brands which used to be an abbreviation of a company name. The name 'UBS' came from one of its predecessor firms – the Union Bank of Switzerland. In fact, that was one of the more than 370 financial firms that have, since 1862, become part of today's UBS. Its logo of three keys was carried over from SBC, and stands for the company's values of confidence, security, and discretion.

During the 2008 financial crisis , UBS managed heavy losses with an asset relief recovery programme. [ citation needed ] In 2011, the company was hit by the 2011 rogue trader scandal resulting in a US$2 billion trading loss. In 2012, the bank reoriented itself around wealth management advisory services and limited its sell side operations.

UBS' earliest corporate ancestor was formed in 1854, when six private banking firms in Basel , Switzerland pooled their resources to form the Bankverein , a consortium that acted as an underwriting syndicate for its member banks. In 1871, the Bankverein coordinated with the German Frankfurter Bankverein to form the Basler Bankverein , a joint-stock company replacing the original Bankverein consortium. After the new bank started with an initial commitment of CHF 30 million and CHF 6 million of share capital, it soon experienced growing pains when heavy losses in Germany caused it to suspend its dividend until 1879. Following the years 1885 and 1886, when the bank merged with the Zürcher Bankverein and acquired the Basler Depositenbank and the Schweizerische Unionbank, it changed its name to Schweizerischer Bankverein . The English name of the bank was originally Swiss Bankverein, but was changed to Swiss Bank Corporation (SBC) in 1917.

SBC subsequently experienced a period of growth, which was only interrupted by the onset of World War I , in which the bank lost investments in a number of large industrial companies. By the end of 1918, the bank had recovered and surpassed CHF 1 billion in total assets and grew to 2,000 employees by 1920. The impact of the stock market crash of 1929 and the Great Depression was severe, particularly as the Swiss franc suffered major devaluation in 1936. The bank saw its assets fall from a 1929 peak of CHF 1.6 billion to its 1918 levels of CHF 1 billion by 1936.

In 1937, SBC adopted its three-keys logo, designed by Warja Honegger-Lavater , symbolizing confidence, security, and discretion, which remains an integral part in the current-day logo of UBS. On the eve of World War II in 1939, SBC, like other Swiss banks, was the recipient of large influxes of foreign funds for safekeeping. Just prior to the outbreak of the war, SBC made the timely decision to open an office in New York City. The office, located in the Equitable Building , was able to begin operations a few weeks after the outbreak of the war and was intended as a safe place to store assets in the case of an invasion. During the war, the banks' traditional business fell off and the Swiss government became its largest client.

In 1945, SBC acquired the Basler Handelsbank (Commercial Bank of Basel), which was one of the largest banks in Switzerland, but became insolvent by the end of the war. SBC remained among the Swiss government's leading underwriters of debt in the post-war years. SBC, which had entered the 1950s with 31 branch offices in Switzerland and three abroad, more than doubled its assets from the end of the war to CHF 4 billion by the end of the 1950s and doubled assets again in the mid-1960s, exceeding CHF 10 billion by 1965. In 1961, SBC acquired Banque Populaire Valaisanne , based in Sion, Switzerland , and the Banque Populaire de Sierre . The bank opened a full branch office in Tokyo in 1970.

In 1992, SBC acquired O'Connor & Associates , a Chicago-based options trading firm and the largest market maker in the financial options exchanges in the U.S. O'Connor was combined with SBC's money market , capital market , and currency market activities to form a globally integrated capital markets and treasury operation . In 1994, SBC acquired Brinson Partners , an asset management firm focused on providing access for U.S. institutions to global markets, for US$750 million. Following the acquisition, founder Gary P. Brinson ran SBC's asset management business and later when SBC merged with UBS was named chief investment officer of UBS Asset Management. The acquisition of S.G. Warburg & Co. , a leading British investment banking firm, in 1995 for the price of US$1.4 billion (~$ 2.62 billion in 2024 ) signified a major push into investment banking. S.G. Warburg & Co. had established a reputation as a daring merchant bank that grew to be one of the most respected investment banks in London. However, a Warburg expansion into the U.S. had turned out flawed and costly, and talks in 1994 with Morgan Stanley about a merger had collapsed. SBC merged the firm with its own existing investment banking unit to create SBC Warburg.

Two years later, in 1997, SBC paid US$600 million (~$ 1.09 billion in 2024 ) to acquire Dillon, Read & Co. , a U.S. bulge bracket investment bank. Dillon, Read & Co., which traced its roots to the 1830s, was among the powerhouse firms on Wall Street in the 1920s and 1930s, and by the 1990s had a particularly strong mergers and acquisitions advisory group. Dillon Read had been in negotiations to sell itself to ING , which owned 25% of the firm already, but Dillon Read partners balked at ING 's integration plans. After its acquisition by SBC, Dillon Read was merged with SBC-Warburg to create SBC-Warburg Dillon Read. Following SBC's later merger with Union Bank of Switzerland , the SBC part was dropped from the name; in 2000 when the new UBS got restructured the Dillon Read name was dropped, although it was brought back in 2005 as Dillon Read Capital Management , UBS's ill-fated hedge fund operations.

The Union Bank of Switzerland emerged in 1912 when the Bank in Winterthur fused with the Toggenburger Bank . The Bank in Winterthur, founded in 1862 with an initial share capital of CHF 5 million, focused on providing financing for industry and other companies, and had profited considerably from its close railroad connections and large warehousing facilities during the American Civil War when cotton prices rose dramatically. The Toggenburger Bank was founded in 1863 with an initial share capital of CHF 1.5 million, and specialized as a savings and mortgage bank for individual customers, maintaining a branch office network in eastern Switzerland. The new company was initially traded under the English name Swiss Banking Association , but in 1921 it was changed to Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) to mirror its French name, Union de Banques Suisses . In German, the bank was known as the Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft (SBG).

The combined bank had total assets of CHF 202 million and a total shareholders' equity of CHF 46 million. In 1917, UBS completed the construction of a new headquarters, Münzhof , in Zurich 's Bahnhofstrasse , considered to be the Wall Street of Switzerland. By 1923, offices were established throughout Switzerland. Although the bank suffered in the aftermath of World War I and the Great Depression , it was able to make several smaller acquisitions ; in 1937 it established Intrag AG, an asset management business responsible for investment trusts , (i.e. mutual funds ).

The activities of the Union Bank of Switzerland during World War II were not publicly known until decades after the war, when it was demonstrated that UBS likely took active roles in trading stolen gold, securities , and other assets during World War II. The issue of "unclaimed property" of Holocaust victims became a major issue for UBS in the mid-1990s, and a series of revelations in 1997 brought the issue to the forefront of national attention in 1996 and 1997. UBS confirmed that a large number of accounts had gone unclaimed as a result of the bank's policy of requiring death certificates from family members to claim the contents of the account. UBS's handling of these revelations were largely criticized and the bank received significant negative attention in the U.S. UBS came under significant pressure, particularly from American politicians, to compensate Holocaust survivors who were making claims against the bank.

Shortly after the end of World War II, Union Bank of Switzerland completed the acquisition of the Eidgenössische Bank , a large Zürich-based bank that became insolvent . As a result of the merger, Union Bank of Switzerland exceeded CHF 1 billion in assets and moved its operations to Zürich. UBS opened branches and acquired a series of banks in Switzerland in the following years, growing from 31 offices in 1950 to 81 offices by the early 1960s. In 1960, Union Bank of Switzerland acquired an 80% stake in Argor SA, a Swiss precious metals refinery founded in 1951 in the canton of Ticino . UBS continues to issue gold bars via Argor-Heraeus which is famous for the unique kinebar holographic technology it uses to provide enhanced protection against bank gold bar counterfeiting . By 1962, Union Bank of Switzerland reached CHF 6.96 billion of assets, narrowly edging ahead of Swiss Bank Corporation to become the largest bank in Switzerland. The rapid growth was punctuated by the 1967 acquisition of Interhandel , which made UBS one of the strongest banks in Europe.

By the 1980s, Union Bank of Switzerland established a position as a leading European underwriter of Eurobonds . Following two major acquisitions in 1986 ( Phillips & Drew and Deutsche Länderbank ), UBS made its first purchase in the United States in 1991 with Chase Investors Management Corporation, the asset management business of Chase Manhattan Bank . At the time of the acquisition, the business managed in excess of US$30 billion in assets. The bank's investments had been in the conservative asset management and life insurance businesses; further, 60% of the bank's profits came from its even more conservative Swiss banking operations. In 1993, Credit Suisse outbid Union Bank of Switzerland for Switzerland's Swiss Volksbank , the fifth largest bank in Switzerland which had run into financial difficulties in the early 1990s. The acquisition propelled Credit Suisse ahead of Union Bank of Switzerland as the largest bank in Switzerland for the first time. Prior to the merger with Swiss Bank Corporation, UBS purchased a group of smaller Swiss banks in 1994 including the Cantonal Bank of Appenzell-Ausserrhoden in 1996, and in 1997 Schröder, Münchmeyer, Hengst & Co. from Lloyds Bank was acquired to improve access to the German investment banking and private wealth management markets.

During the mid-1990s, Union Bank of Switzerland came under fire from dissident shareholders critical of its conservative management and lower return on equity. Martin Ebner, through his investment trust, BK Vision, became the largest shareholder in Union Bank of Switzerland and attempted to force a major restructuring of the bank's operations. Looking to take advantage of the situation, Credit Suisse approached Union Bank of Switzerland about a merger that would have created the second largest bank in the world in 1996. Union Bank of Switzerland's management and board unanimously rebuffed the proposed merger. Ebner, who supported the idea of a merger, led a shareholder revolt that resulted in the replacement of Union Bank of Switzerland's chairman, Robert Studer with Mathis Cabiallavetta, one of the key architects of the merger with Swiss Bank Corporation .

On 8 December 1997, Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation announced an all-stock merger. At the time of the merger, Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation were the second and third largest banks in Switzerland, respectively. Discussions between the two banks had begun several months earlier, less than a year after rebuffing Credit Suisse's merger overtures. The merger resulted in the creation of UBS AG, a new bank with total assets of more than US$590 billion (~$ 1.07 trillion in 2024 ), the largest of its kind. During the merger, UBS chairman Marcel Ospel originally wanted to call the company "United Bank of Switzerland", but settled on simply using "UBS" following the acquisition of American brokerage firm, Paine Webber .

Colloquially referred to as the "New UBS" to distinguish itself from the former Union Bank of Switzerland, the combined bank became the second largest in the world at the time, behind only the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi . Additionally, the merger pulled together the banks' various asset management businesses to create the world's largest money manager, with approximately US$910 billion in assets under management . Union Bank of Switzerland's Mathis Cabiallavetta became chairman of the new bank while Swiss Bank's Marcel Ospel was named chief executive officer. Nearly 80% of the top management positions were filled by legacy Swiss Bank professionals. Prior to the merger, Swiss Bank Corporation was considered to be further along than Union Bank of Switzerland in developing its international investment banking business, particularly in the higher margin advisory businesses where Warburg Dillon Read was considered to be the more established platform. Union Bank of Switzerland had a stronger retail and commercial banking business in Switzerland, while both banks had strong asset management capabilities. After the merger was completed, it was speculated that a series of losses suffered by UBS on its equity derivative positions in late 1997 was a contributing factor in pushing UBS management to consummate the merger.

On 3 November 2000, UBS merged with Paine Webber , an American stock brokerage and asset management firm led by chairman and CEO Donald Marron . At the time of its merger with UBS, Paine Webber had emerged as the fourth largest private client firm in the United States with 385 offices employing 8,554 brokers. The acquisition pushed UBS to the top wealth and asset management firm in the world. Initially, the business was given the divisional name UBS PaineWebber but in 2003 the 123-year-old name Paine Webber disappeared when it was renamed UBS Wealth Management USA . UBS took a CHF 1 billion write-down for the loss of goodwill associated with the retirement of the Paine Webber brand when it integrated its brands under the unified UBS name in 2003.

John P. Costas , a former bond trader and co-head of Fixed income at Credit Suisse First Boston and head of Fixed Income Trading at Union Bank of Switzerland in 1998, was appointed CEO of UBS's investment banking division, which originated in SBC's Warburg Dillon Read division and was renamed UBS Warburg in December 2001. In an attempt to break into the elite bulge bracket of investment banks, in which UBS then had little success while rival Credit Suisse was establishing itself as a major player on Wall Street with the acquisition of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette in 2000, Costas shifted the growth strategy from acquiring entire firms to hiring individual investment bankers or teams of bankers from rival firms. Costas had followed a similar approach in building out the UBS fixed income business, hiring over 500 sales and trading personnel and increasing revenues from US$300 million in 1998 to over US$3 billion by 2001.

The arrival of former Drexel Burnham Lambert investment banker Ken Moelis marked a major coup for Costas. Moelis joined UBS from Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette in 2001 shortly after its acquisition by Credit Suisse First Boston (although Huw Jenkins claimed he had hired Moelis to the UK Parliamentary Banking commission while under oath, which is patently false). In his six years at UBS, Moelis ultimately assumed the role of president of UBS Investment Bank and was credited, along with Costas, with the build-out of UBS's investment banking operation in the United States. Within weeks of joining, Moelis brought over a team of 70 bankers from Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette. Costas and Moelis hired more than 30 senior U.S. bankers from 2001 through 2004. It was estimated that UBS spent as much as US$600 million to US$700 million hiring top bankers in the U.S. during this three-year period. Among the bank's other major recruits during this period were Olivier Sarkozy , Ben Lorello, Blair Effron , and Jeff McDermott. By 2003, UBS had risen to fourth place from seventh in global investment banking fees, earning US$2.1 billion of the US$39 billion paid to investment banks that year, increasing 33%. Over the next four years, UBS consistently ranked in the top 4 in the global fee pool and established a track record of 20 consecutive quarters of rising profits.

In 2006, UBS set up a joint venture in China (see UBS Securities, China branch ). However, by the end of 2006, UBS began to experience changing fortunes. In late 2005, Costas headed a new hedge fund unit within UBS known as Dillon Read Capital Management . His former position was taken over by Huw Jenkins , a long-time legacy UBS investment banker. In 2006, UBS bankers Blair Effron and Michael Martin announced their departures. In March 2007, Moelis announced that he was leaving the company, and shortly thereafter founded a new business, Moelis & Company . As he had when joining UBS, Moelis took a large team of senior UBS investment bankers. Moelis's departure was caused primarily by repeated conflict over the availability of capital from the bank's balance sheet to pursue large transactions , particularly leveraged buyouts . The bank's apparent conservatism would be turned on its head when large losses were reported in various mortgage securities rather than corporate loans that generated investment banking fees. After Moelis, other notable departures included investment banking co-head Jeff McDermott in early 2007 and, as the 2008 financial crisis set in, other high-profile bankers such as Oliver Sarkozy in early 2008 and Ben Lorello in 2009.

UBS was fined $100 million by the FED in 2004 for trading in dollars with Iran and other sanctioned countries.

At the beginning of 2007, UBS became the first Wall Street firm to announce a heavy loss in the subprime mortgage sector as the subprime mortgage crisis began to develop. In May 2007, UBS announced the closure of its Dillon Read Capital Management (DRCM) division. Although in 2006, DCRM had generated a profit for the bank of US$720 million, after UBS took over DRCM's positions in May 2007, losses grew from the US$124 million recorded by DRCM, ultimately to "16% of the US$19 billion in losses UBS recorded." The UBS investment bank continued to expand subprime risk in the second quarter of 2007 while most market participants were reducing risk, resulting in not only expanding DRCM losses but creating 84% of the other losses experienced by the bank.

In response to the growing series of problems at UBS, and possibly his role in spearheading Costas' departure from the bank, Peter Wuffli unexpectedly stepped down as CEO of the firm during the second quarter of 2007. Wuffli would be joined by many of his fellow managers in the next year, most notably the bank's chairman Marcel Ospel . However, the bank's problems continued through the end of 2007, when the bank reported its first quarterly loss in over five years. As its losses jeopardized the bank's capital position, UBS quickly raised US$11.5 billion of capital in December 2007, US$9.7 billion of which came from the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation (GIC) and US$1.8 billion from an unnamed Middle Eastern investor.

After a significant expansion of fixed income risk during 2006 and 2007 under the leadership of Huw Jenkins , the UBS Investment Bank CEO, the bank's losses continued to mount in 2008 when UBS announced in April 2008 that it was writing down a further US$19 billion of investments in subprime and other mortgage assets.

By this point, UBS's total losses in the mortgage market were in excess of US$37 billion, the largest such losses of any of its peers. In response to its losses, UBS announced a CHF 15 billion rights offering to raise the additional funds need to shore up its depleted reserves of capital. UBS cut its dividend to protect its traditionally high Tier 1 capital ratio, seen by investors as a key to its credibility as the world's largest wealth management company. In October 2008, UBS announced that it had placed CHF 6 billion of new capital, through mandatory convertible notes, with Swiss Confederation . The Swiss National Bank and UBS made an agreement to transfer approximately US$60 billion of currently illiquid securities and various assets from UBS to a separate fund entity. In November 2008, UBS put US$6 billion (~$ 8.56 billion in 2024 ) of equity into the new "bad bank" entity, keeping only an option to benefit if the value of its assets were to recover. Heralded as a "neat" package by The New York Times , the UBS structure guaranteed clarity for UBS investors by making an outright sale. UBS announced in February 2009 that it had lost nearly CHF 20 billion (US$17.2 billion) in 2008, the biggest single-year loss of any company in Swiss history. During the 2008 financial crisis , UBS wrote down more than US$50 billion (~$ 72.7 billion in 2024 ) from subprime mortgage investments and cut more than 11,000 jobs. By the spring of 2009, UBS announced another management restructuring and initiated a plan to return to profitability. Jerker Johansson , the head of the investment bank division, resigned in April 2009 and was replaced by Alex Wilmot-Sitwell and Carsten Kengeter . At the same time, UBS announced the planned cut of 8,700 jobs and had implemented a new compensation plan. Under the plan, no more than one-third of any cash bonus would be paid out in the year it is earned with the rest to be held in reserve and stock-based incentives that would vest after three years. In April 2009, UBS announced that it agreed to sell its Brazilian financial services business, UBS Pactual , for approximately US$2.5 billion (~$ 3.54 billion in 2024 ) to BTG Investments.

The Swiss government sold its CHF 6 billion stake in UBS in late 2008 at a large profit; Switzerland had purchased convertible notes in 2008 to help UBS clear its balance sheets of toxic assets. Taking advantage of improved conditions in the stock market in mid-2009, UBS placed US$3.5 billion of shares with a small number of large institutional investors . Oswald Grübel announced, "We are building a new UBS, one that performs to the highest standards and behaves with integrity and honesty; one that distinguishes itself not only through the clarity and reliability of the advice and services it provides but in how it manages and executes." Grübel reiterated plans to maintain an integrated business model of providing wealth management advisory, investment banking, and asset management services.

In August 2010, UBS launched a new advertising campaign featuring the slogan: "We will not rest" and signed a global sponsorship agreement with Formula 1 . On 26 October 2010, UBS announced that its private bank recorded net new funds of CHF 900 million during the third quarter, compared to an outflow of CHF 5.5 billion in second quarter. UBS's third quarter net profit of US$1.65 billion (~$ 2.31 billion in 2024 ) beat analyst estimates, continuing a string of profitability. After the elimination of almost 5,000 jobs, UBS announced on 23 August 2011 that it was further cutting another 3,500 positions to "improve operating efficiency" and save CHF 1.5 to CHF 2 billion a year. 45 percent of the job cuts would come from the investment banking unit, which continued to post dismal figures since the 2008 financial crisis , while the rest would come from the wealth management and asset management divisions. The firm has seen profits fall due to the rise of the Swiss franc.

On 15 September 2011, UBS became aware of a massive loss, originally estimated at US$2 billion (~$ 2.74 billion in 2024 ), allegedly due to unauthorized trading by Kweku Adoboli , a then 31-year-old Ghanaian trader on the delta one desk of the firm's investment bank. Adoboli was arrested and later charged with fraud by abuse of position and false accounting dating as far back as 2008. UBS's actual losses were subsequently confirmed as US$2.3 billion, and according to the prosecutor in Adoboli's trial he "was a gamble or two from destroying Switzerland's largest bank for his own benefit." On 24 September 2011 UBS announced chief executive Oswald Grübel 's resignation, and the appointment of Sergio Ermotti as his replacement on an interim basis.

On 30 October 2012, UBS announced that it was cutting 10,000 jobs worldwide in an effort to slim down its investment banking operations, of which 2,500 would be in Switzerland, followed by the United States and Great Britain. This 15-percent staff cut would make overall staff count come down from 63,745 to 54,000. (For comparison, the peak employment level in 2007 before the 2008 financial crisis was 83,500). UBS also announced that the investment bank would focus on its traditional strengths and exit much of its fixed income trading business that was not economically profitable. On 19 December 2012, UBS was fined $1.5 billion (~$ 2.02 billion in 2024 ) for its role in the Libor scandal over accusations that it tried to rig benchmark interest rates. In November 2014, regulators including the FCA and CFTC hit UBS with fines, along with other banks, for currency manipulation . On 6 January 2014, it was reported that UBS had become the largest private banker in the world, with $1.7 (~$ 2.21 trillion in 2024 ) trillion in assets. In May 2015, media reports revealed UBS is planning to sell its Australian private banking division to some of its management after a review of underperforming businesses was conducted at the company.

In late 2016, the bank created the digital currency "Utility Settlement Coin" (USC) to accelerate inter-bank settlements and established a blockchain technology research laboratory in London. From 2012 to 2018, the investment bank, led by Andrea Orcel , initiated a major restructuring , firing over 10,000 employees and focusing on European underwriting business instead of traditional dealmaking. UBS announced in January 2018 that it does not trade or expose clients to cryptocurrencies as it believes they have little to no elasticity , and are speculatively valued . It partnered with technology company IBM to launch a blockchain trade finance platform called "Batavia" in early 2018.

In April 2021, UBS reported a $774 million (~$ 881 million in 2024 ) loss from the collapse of US investment fund Archegos Capital Management .

In July 2021, during the COVID-19 pandemic , UBS announced it would continue to allow for flextime and remote work by many employees, noting that they did not impede productivity. The announcement distinguished the bank from its competitors, such as Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs , which pressured on employees to return to the office as COVID-19 lockdowns and measures eased.

In January 2022, UBS agreed to acquire Wealthfront for $1.4 billion. UBS expects to accelerate its growth in the US with the purchase, and will operate Wealthfront as a business within UBS Global Wealth Management. The acquisition was mutually terminated in September 2022 with both companies not providing a reason. UBS announced that it would instead invest in a $69.7 million note convertible into Wealthfront shares, valuing the latter at its acquisition price.

In November 2022, Fang Xinghai, vice chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission , made remarks by prerecorded video to the Global Financial Leaders' Investment Summit . In it, he warned investors to not read too much foreign news (international media) about China, and said that some international investors read "too much" of it. Later at the Summit, Colm Kelleher said, regarding global bankers, that "we're all very pro-China," and in reference to Fang's comments, said "We're not reading the American press, we actually buy the [China] story."

In March 2023, UBS agreed to buy Credit Suisse , one of its main competitors, for $3.25 billion (CHF 3 billion), in an emergency rescue deal. On 29 March 2023 it was announced that Sergio Ermotti is returning as chief executive officer from 5 April 2023, replacing Ralph Hamers after just over two years in charge, after approval by 5 April 2023 annual general meeting. Hamers is expected to stay with the bank for a transition period. UBS completed the acquisition on 12 June 2023.

On 28 June, it became known that UBS plans to lay off more than half of Credit Suisse's employees. First of all, the reduction will affect traders and support staff in London, New York and some Asian divisions. Prior to the takeover, Credit Suisse employed about 45,000 people.

In July 2023, UBS was fined $269 million by the Federal Reserve and $119 million by the Bank of England for Credit Suisse's failure in risk management related to Archegos's collapse. In August 2023, UBS settled with the US Justice Department by agreeing to pay $1.43 billion in civil penalties regarding allegations of fraud and misconduct in its residential mortgage-backed securities offerings it offered in 2006 and 2007.

According to Citigroup , the new bank will account for 35% of domestic deposits, 31% of corporate loans and 26% of mortgages in Switzerland. UBS will keep the Swiss business of Credit Suisse but will retire its brand. UBS says it plans to cut costs by $10 billion. UBS also announced at the end of August 2023 that money outflows have stopped at Credit Suisse.

In early September 2023, UBS had clearly profited from the takeover as its stocks were increasingly valuable. From April to July, UBS made a record profit of 29.2 billion CHF and its stocks, which were initially depressed after the fusion, were traded at much higher prices. The record profit was based on the difference between the purchase price of Credit Suisse stocks and the apparently higher value of its assets.

In September 2023, the US Department of Justice (DOJ) started investigating UBS for Credit Suisse's alleged compliance failures which enabled its Russian clients to dodge sanctions. Later UBS stated that the bank is not aware of such a probe by the DOJ and that previous reports on such allegations were incorrect.

In May 2025, UBS agreed to pay $511 million to settle a U.S. Department of Justice investigation into Credit Suisse 's assistance to wealthy Americans in hiding over $4 billion in offshore accounts. This settlement includes a guilty plea from Credit Suisse Services AG for aiding in the preparation of false tax returns and a non-prosecution agreement related to undeclared accounts in Singapore.

In October 2025, UBS appointed Beatriz Martin as its chief operations officer, who had been the company's chief group integration officer since 2023. As part of the role, Martin will oversee the integration of Credit Suisse following its acquisition in 2023. In the same announcement, UBS said it remains on track to complete the Credit Suisse integration by the end of 2026.

In February 2026, UBS joins foreign banks expanding India global capability hubs and  opened a new global capability centre in the southern Indian city of Hyderabad.

As it exists today, UBS represents a conglomeration of dozens of individual firms, many of which date back to the 19th century. Over the years, these firms merged to form the bank's three major predecessors, Union Bank of Switzerland , Swiss Bank Corporation , ICO Markets Exchange Clearing Limited and Paine Webber . The following is a visual illustration of the company's major mergers and acquisitions and historical predecessors, although this is not necessarily a comprehensive list:

As disclosed under the Swiss Stock exchange Act, the most significant shareholders of UBS are GIC Private Limited with 7.07%, BlackRock Inc with 4.98%, Norges Bank with 3.30%, MFS Investment Management with 3.05% and Capital Group Companies with 3.01% of total share capital. In 2008 during the subprime mortgage crisis , GIC Private Limited invested CHF 11 billion into UBS to help bail it out, thus becoming the largest single shareholder.

Additionally, the UBS Group AG disclosed shareholders registered in their share register with 3% or more of shares issued. As of 30 September 2017, these are Chase Nominees Ltd, DTC (Cede & Co.) and Nortrust Nominees Ltd with 10.32%, 6.63% and 4.04% of total share capital respectively.

As of 30 June 2019, shareholdings of the Group were distributed as follows:

UBS frequently cites Swiss culture —specifically its penchant for privacy, security and neutrality —as foundational to its company culture. Although banking secrecy started in the 1700s , Switzerland drafted a series of banking regulations and statutes in the late 1800s and 1930s to protect and secure banks within its borders. The most prominent was the Federal Act on Banks and Savings Banks , known simply as the "Banking Law of 1934". The federal law prohibits and criminalizes the distribution and release of client information to third parties. The bill was passed by the Swiss Federal Assembly to combat the seizure of client assets and information for reasons debated by historians . UBS, then known as the Swiss Bank Corporation , received large influxes of capital from Europe for safe keeping during the war. More than two dozen Swiss banking statutes were drafted from 1934 to 2008 to strengthen banking secrecy at UBS Switzerland AG. In 2018, Switzerland, alongside major Swiss banks including UBS, was ranked first on the Financial Secrecy Index . UBS was the largest wealth manager in 23 of the top 25 countries on the 2018 Financial Secrecy Index.

While UBS maintains the strictest banking secrecy policies in Switzerland, its policies across Europe and especially the United States are comparable. [ better source needed ] Within the U.S., the bank is prohibited from disclosing client activities and information both internally and through regulation imposed by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), Federal Reserve , Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), U.S. Treasury , Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and various U.S. state regulators. UBS employees are prohibited from discussing client activity or information publicly, sharing information across borders, retaining client information insecurely and required to maintain robust bank-client confidentiality agreements. In 2018, UBS operations within the U.S. were ranked second on the Financial Secrecy Index, following UBS Switzerland AG. Within the European Union (E.U.), UBS operations maintain similar banking secrecy policies to Switzerland in the following countries and crown dependencies: Jersey , Austria , Luxembourg , Liechtenstein , Monaco , and the Isle of Man . Substantial, albeit greatly reduced, banking secrecy provisions are afforded to UBS operations in France, Germany, Ireland, and the Netherlands .

UBS, along with other Swiss banks, maintains a variety of hidden assets and numbered bank accounts in an effort to preserve anonymity and confidentiality. Despite its name, hidden accounts are not truly hidden. The usage of these types of accounts (and assets) limits the knowledge of the account between the client and a restricted number of private bankers who retain record of who the account belongs to.

In January 1997, Christoph Meili , a night guard at the Union Bank of Switzerland (precursor of UBS) in Zürich , publicly announced that bank officials were destroying documents about orphaned assets, believed to be the credit balances of both Nazi German and Jewish clients attained during World War II . Soon after, Zurich authorities opened a judicial investigation against Meili for suspected violations of the Swiss laws on banking secrecy. After a US$2.56 billion lawsuit was filed against UBS and other Swiss banks on behalf of the Jewish victims of the Holocaust , a settlement was reached that totalled US$1.25 billion in August 1998. In July 2025, Bloomberg News reported investigators had uncovered documents that suggested Credit Suisse did not disclose billions of dollars of assets held in accounts owned by Nazis and that the bank could be liable for between $5 billion to $10 billion. UBS opened its own investigation, hiring Neil Barofsky to complete a report on the matter. The U.S. Senate also opened an investigation. UBS said it would resist efforts to reopen the 1998 settlement or expand the scope of the investigation.

The Swiss government has taken steps to curb the usage of hidden services by foreign account holders as they have been frequently used to facilitate the transfer of " black money ". In May 2013, Switzerland announced that it would amend certain banking secrecy laws applicable to UBS Switzerland AG to allow the disclosure of hidden client accounts to various investigative authorities. However, the disclosure of such information is heavily regulated and only "occur exclusively within the scope of administrative assistance procedures based on a valid double taxation agreement."

UBS, along with other Swiss banks, owns and operates undisclosed or otherwise secretive bank vaults, storage facilities or underground bunkers for gold bars, diamonds, cash, or other valuable physical assets. The geographical location of these facilities are undisclosed to the public but are known to be present in the mountainous regions of the Swiss Alps . These facilities are not subject to the same banking regulations as banks in Switzerland and do not have to report holdings to regulatory agencies. According to the Swiss Armed Forces , UBS purchased four former military bunkers to convert into storage facilities throughout the 1980s and 1990s. Three of these bunkers are not accessible by road or foot and require aircraft transportation. The transfer of assets to these bunkers is selective as a multi-stage security clearance is required and is not available to all UBS clients. In special circumstances, UBS contracts smaller banks in Southern Switzerland to maintain company assets.

The largest disclosed Swiss bank vault is five floors ( 19 metres or 62 feet ) under the bank's Geneva headquarters. In July 2013, UBS established a gold storage facility and depository in Singapore for high net worth and ultra high net worth clients in its Hong Kong, China, and Malaysia markets who are willing to pay high fees and commissions for the highest level of secrecy and safety for their assets.

The strict banking secrecy policies and bank-client confidentiality agreements at UBS have frequently been used to avoid, evade or otherwise escape foreign direct taxation . UBS reached multilateral agreements with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and U.K. HM Revenue and Customs in 2009 and 2010, respectively. These agreements ensured a line of communication between the tax agencies and all registered Swiss banks. The most commonly used stipulation triggered by select UBS Switzerland AG clients regard the following statute : Swiss banks are only allowed to disclose client information if a client is legally charged with proof of deliberate financial fraud , not merely the non-reporting of assets to avoid taxation.

The banking privacy policies of UBS have led to numerous controversies and disagreements with foreign governments:

In December 2021, UBS was criminally convicted by an appeals court in France for "illegal banking activities", money laundering and "aggravated tax fraud " and fined €1.8 billion. UBS has said it is appealing that decision.

In January 2010, UBS issued a new code of conduct and business ethics which all employees were encouraged to sign. The code addressed issues such as financial crime , competition, confidentiality , as well as human rights and environmental issues . The eight-page code also lays out potential sanctions against employees who violate it, including warnings, demotions , or dismissal . According to Kaspar Villiger , former chairman of the board, and Oswald J. Grübel , former Group CEO, the code is "an integral part of changing the way UBS conducts business".

In 2011, UBS expanded its global compliance database to include information on environmental and social issues provided by RepRisk , a global research firm specialized in environmental, social and corporate governance (e.g., ESG ) risk analytics and metrics. This was done in an effort to mitigate environmental and social risks that could impact the bank's reputation or financial performance and to simultaneously help globally standardize and systematically implement the firm's due diligence processes. RepRisk data is used in the on-boarding process to screen potential new clients and sourcing partners, alongside periodic client reviews and, also, to evaluate the risks related to transactions in investment banking and institutional lending.

In 2018, UBS held 0.72% of shares in HikVision (surveillance cameras), a subsidiary of the Chinese military conglomerate CETC.

In October 2019, UBS joined UN's Global Investors for Sustainable Development Alliance (GISD). UBS has committed to raise US$5 billion (~$ 5.69 billion in 2024 ) of SDG-related impact investments by the end of 2021, which aim to create a measurable positive social or environmental impact.

UBS has been an early adopter regarding the use of blockchain technology in financial services. In April 2015, UBS opened an innovation lab at the Level39 technology accelerator space in London.

In August 2016, UBS announced that it will team up with BNY Mellon , Deutsche Bank , Banco Santander , brokerage company ICAP and the fintech company Clearmatics, to promote UBS's "Utility Settlement Coin" (USC). The USC is a blockchain-based digital currency that financial institutions could use to transact securities with each other, bypassing the traditional settlement processes which is ongoing.

In 2021, UBS buys 31% ICO Markets Exchange Clearing Limited , Digital Asset Exchange , Regulator Company in the European Digital Asset Market which financial institutions and private clients they will use to trade securities among themselves, bypassing the traditional ongoing settlement processes.

In 2018, UBS digitally cloned Daniel Kalt, one of its chief economists. Artificial intelligence expert FaceMe was hired to create an interactive avatar of Kalt that can meet with clients via television screen. The clients will be able to ask questions and receive answers, made possible by IBM 's Watson AI technology.

In 2006, for the fourth consecutive year, UBS was named one of the 100 Best Companies for Working Mothers living in the U.S. by Working Mother magazine. It is a member of the Stonewall Diversity Champions scheme and has active gay and lesbian, ethnic minority, and women's networking groups. UBS was included on Business Week ' s The Best Places to Launch a Career 2008 , and ranked No. 96 out of the 119 total companies listed. On 2 February 2010, UBS topped the charts for the ninth year in a row in Institutional Investor's annual ranking of Europe's most highly regarded equity analysts. In a year of extremes for equity markets, money managers say that no firm did a better job than UBS to keep them informed about which European sectors, countries, and industries offered the greatest potential. On 4 May 2010, UBS Investment Bank was voted the leading pan-European brokerage firm for equity and equity linked research for a record tenth successive year. A Thomson Reuters Extel survey ranked UBS number one in all three of the key disciplines of research: Research (tenth year); Sales (ninth year running); and Equity Trading and Execution (up from second place in 2009). UBS was also named as the number one leading pan-European brokerage firm for economics and strategy research.

On 31 October 2013, UBS Wealth Management was voted the Best Global Private Bank by Professional Wealth Management , retaining the title in 2014 while also being recognized as the Best Private Bank for Philanthropy Services , and Best Global Brand in Private Banking . On 27 October 2016, for the 4th consecutive year, UBS Wealth Management won the Best Global Private Bank title, as well as the Best Private Bank in Asia award for the 5th consecutive year. UBS won the top prize again in 2018.

In 2014, the Group received Euromoney 's Awards for Excellence 2014 as the Best global bank , and as the Best Bank in Switzerland . In 2017, UBS not only retained its leading position taken in 2016 in the main category best private banking services overall at the Euromoney 's Private Banking Awards , but also received recognition as Western Europe's best bank for advisory 2017 .

In 2018, for the third consecutive year, RobecoSAM, an organization specialized exclusively on Sustainability Investing and conducting extensive research, named UBS in its Industry group leader report 2018 for each of the industry groups represented in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index the group leader in Diversified Financials . The report highlighted Group's sustainability efforts directed through its UBS and Society program: a cross-divisional platform involving activities and capabilities in sustainable investing and philanthropy, environmental and human rights policies, UBS's own environmental footprint, as well as the community investment. The Group also received recognition from Global Finance which rates financial services providers that best meet the specialized needs of corporations on a global level. The selection criteria are focused less on the size, but rather on qualities that companies look for when choosing a provider. UBS was named in the category Global Winners as Best Private Bank in the World 2017, and in the list of global best banks 2017, the Group received the award as Global Winner in the category World's Best Investment Banks 2017 .

In 2019, UBS was listed as one of the Top 50 World's Most Attractive Employers Global Business Ranking 2019 by Universum Global Survey.

UBS is particularly active in sponsoring various golf tournaments , cross-country skiing in Switzerland, ice hockey , and a range of other events around the world. UBS was the sponsor of the Alinghi sailing ship, winner of the America's Cup in 2003. UBS has been or currently is a sponsor of the following sporting events and organizations:

UBS's cultural sponsorships are typically related to classical music and contemporary art, although the company also sponsors a range of film festivals, music festivals, and other cultural events and organizations. UBS supported the Guggenheim UBS MAP Global Art Initiative in which the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation identified and worked with artists, curators and educators from South and Southeast Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East and North Africa to expand their reach in the international art world and challenge the Western-centric view of art history . UBS has previously been or currently is a sponsor of the following cultural events and organizations:

UBS currently holds the naming rights to UBS Arena which is the home of the New York Islanders .Other reasons this message may be displayed:

The Enron scandal was an accounting scandal sparked by American energy company Enron Corporation filing for bankruptcy after news of widespread internal fraud became public in October 2001, which led to the dissolution of its accounting firm, Arthur Andersen , previously one of the five largest in the world. The largest bankruptcy reorganization in U.S. history at that time, Enron was cited as the biggest audit failure.

Enron was formed in 1985 by Kenneth Lay after merging Houston Natural Gas and InterNorth . Several years later, when Jeffrey Skilling was hired, Lay developed a staff of executives that – by the use of accounting loopholes, the misuse of mark-to-market accounting , special purpose entities , and poor financial reporting – were able to hide billions of dollars in debt from failed deals and projects. Chief Financial Officer Andrew Fastow and other executives misled Enron's board of directors and audit committee on high-risk accounting practices and pressured Arthur Andersen to ignore the issues.

Shareholders filed a $40 billion lawsuit, for which they were eventually partially compensated $7.2 billion, after the company's stock price plummeted from a high of US$90.75 per share in mid-1990s to less than $1 by the end of November 2001.

The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) began an investigation, and rival Houston competitor Dynegy offered to purchase the company at a very low price. The deal failed, and on December 2, 2001, Enron filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code . Enron's $63.4 billion in assets made it the largest corporate bankruptcy in U.S. history until the WorldCom scandal the following year.

Many executives at Enron were indicted for a variety of charges and some were later sentenced to prison, including former CEO Jeffrey Skilling. Kenneth Lay, then the CEO and chairman, was indicted and convicted but died before being sentenced. Arthur Andersen LLC was found guilty of illegally destroying documents relevant to the SEC investigation, which voided its license to audit public companies and effectively closed the firm. By the time the ruling was overturned at the Supreme Court , Arthur Andersen had lost the majority of its customers and had ceased operating. Enron employees and shareholders received limited returns in lawsuits, and lost billions in pensions and stock prices.

As a consequence of the scandal, new regulations and legislation were enacted to expand the accuracy of financial reporting for public companies. One piece of legislation, the Sarbanes–Oxley Act , increased penalties for destroying, altering, or fabricating records in federal investigations or for attempting to defraud shareholders. The act also increased the accountability of auditing firms to remain unbiased and independent of their clients.

In 1985, Kenneth Lay merged the natural gas pipeline companies of Houston Natural Gas and InterNorth to form a multi-billion dollar company. Just a year later, they then changed the name to Enron. In the early 1990s, Lay helped to initiate the selling of electricity at market prices and soon after, Congress approved legislation deregulating the sale of natural gas. The resulting markets made it possible for traders such as Enron to sell energy at higher prices, thereby significantly increasing its revenue. After producers and local governments decried the resultant price volatility and asked for increased regulation, strong lobbying on the part of Enron and others prevented such regulation. Enron changed from being a natural gas producer and supplier to a trader of energy derivative contracts with the assistance of Jeffrey Skilling, who joined the company as a consultant before rising to the position of chief operating officer.

As Enron became the largest seller of natural gas in North America by 1992, its trading of gas contracts earned $122 million (before interest and taxes), the second largest contributor to the company's net income. The November 1999 creation of the EnronOnline trading website allowed the company to manage its contracts trading business better.

In an attempt to achieve further growth, Enron pursued a diversification strategy. The company owned and operated a variety of assets including gas pipelines, electricity plants, paper plants, water plants, and broadband services across the globe. Enron also gained additional revenue by trading contracts for the same array of products and services it was involved in. This included setting up power generation plants in developing countries and emerging markets including the Philippines ( Subic Bay ), Indonesia and India ( Dabhol ).

The bull market of the 1990s helped to fuel Enron’s ambitions and contributed to its rapid growth. Enron's stock increased from the start of the 1990s until year-end 1998 by 311%, only modestly higher than the average rate of growth in the Standard & Poor 500 index . However, the stock increased by 56% in 1999 and a further 87% in 2000, compared to a 20% increase and a 10% decrease for the index during the same years. By December 31, 2000, Enron's stock was priced at $83.13 and its market capitalization exceeded $60 billion, 70 times earnings and six times book value , an indication of the stock market's high expectations about its prospects. In addition, Enron was rated the most innovative large company in America in Fortune' s Most Admired Companies survey .

Enron's complex financial statements were confusing to shareholders and analysts. When speculative business ventures proved disastrous, it used unethical practices to use accounting limitations to misrepresent earnings and modify the balance sheet to indicate favorable performance.

The combination of these issues later resulted in the bankruptcy of Enron, and the majority of them were perpetuated by the indirect knowledge or direct actions of Lay, Skilling, Andrew Fastow , and other executives such as Rebecca Mark . Lay served as the chairman of Enron in its last few years, and approved of the actions of Skilling and Fastow, although he did not always inquire about the details. Skilling constantly focused on meeting Wall Street expectations, advocated the use of mark-to-market accounting , accounting based on market value, which was then inflated, and pressured Enron executives to find new ways to hide its debt. Fastow and other executives "created off-balance-sheet vehicles, complex financing structures, and deals so bewildering that few people could understand them."

Enron earned profits by providing services such as wholesale trading and risk management in addition to building and maintaining electric power plants, natural gas pipelines, storage, and processing facilities. When accepting the risk of buying and selling products, merchants are allowed to report the selling price as revenues and the products' costs as the cost of goods sold. In contrast, an " agent " provides a service to the customer, but does not take the same risks as merchants for buying and selling. Service providers, when classified as agents, may report trading and brokerage fees as revenue, although not for the full value of the transaction.

Although trading companies such as Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch used the conventional "agent model" for reporting revenue (where only the trading or brokerage fee would be reported as revenue), Enron instead elected to report the entire value of each of its trades as revenue. This "merchant model" was considered much more aggressive in the accounting interpretation than the agent model. Enron's method of reporting inflated trading revenue was later adopted by other companies in the energy trading industry in an attempt to stay competitive with the company's large increase in revenue. Other energy companies such as Duke Energy , Reliant Energy , and Dynegy joined Enron in the largest 50 of the revenue-based Fortune 500 owing mainly to their adoption of the same trading revenue accounting as Enron.

Between 1996 and 2000, Enron's revenues increased by more than 750%, rising from $13.3 billion in 1996 to $100.7 billion in 2000. This expansion of 65% per year was extraordinary in any industry, including the energy industry, which typically considered growth of 2–3% per year to be respectable. For just the first nine months of 2001, Enron reported $138.7 billion in revenues, placing the company at the sixth position on the Fortune Global 500 .

Enron also used creative accounting tricks and purposefully misclassified loan transactions as sales close to quarterly reporting deadlines, similar to the Lehman Brothers Repo 105 scheme in the 2008 financial crisis , or the currency swap concealment of Greek debt by Goldman Sachs. In Enron's case, Merrill Lynch bought Nigerian barges with an alleged buyback guarantee by Enron shortly before the earnings deadline. According to the government, Enron misreported a bridge loan as a true sale, then bought back the barges a few months later. Merrill Lynch executives were tried and in November 2004 convicted for aiding Enron in fraudulent accounting activities. These charges were thrown out on appeal in 2006, after the Merrill Lynch executives had spent nearly a year in prison, with the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans calling the conspiracy and wire fraud charges "flawed". Expert observers said that the reversal was highly unusual for the 5th Circuit, commenting that the conviction must have had serious issues in order to be overturned. The Justice Department decided not to retry the case after the reversal of the verdict.

In Enron's natural gas business, the accounting had previously been fairly straightforward: in each period , the company listed the actual costs of supplying the gas and actual revenues received from selling it. However, when Skilling joined Enron, he demanded that the trading business adopt mark-to-market accounting, claiming that it would represent "true economic value". Enron became the first nonfinancial company to use the method to account for its complex long-term contracts. Mark-to-market accounting requires that once a long-term contract has been signed, income is estimated as the present value of net future cash flow. Often, the viability of these contracts and their related costs were difficult to estimate. Owing to the large discrepancies between reported profits and cash, investors were typically given false or misleading reports. Under this method, income from projects could be recorded, although the firm might never have received the money, with this income increasing financial earnings on the books. However, because in future years the profits could not be included, new and additional income had to be included from more projects to develop additional growth to appease investors. As one Enron competitor stated, "If you accelerate your income, then you have to keep doing more and more deals to show the same or rising income." Despite potential pitfalls, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) approved the accounting method for Enron in its trading of natural gas futures contracts on January 30, 1992. However, Enron later expanded its use to other areas in the company to help it meet Wall Street projections.

For one contract, in July 2000, Enron and Blockbuster Video signed a 20-year agreement to introduce on-demand entertainment to various U.S. cities by year's end. After several pilot projects, Enron claimed estimated profits of more than $110 million from the deal, even though analysts questioned the technical viability and market demand for the service. The parties withdrew from the contract in March 2001, but Enron continued to claim future profits, even though the deal resulted in a loss.

Enron used special purpose entities—limited partnerships or companies created to fulfill a temporary or specific purpose to fund or manage risks associated with specific assets . The company elected to disclose minimal details on its use of "special purpose entities". These shell companies were created by a sponsor, but funded by independent equity investors and debt financing. For financial reporting purposes, a series of rules dictate whether a special purpose entity is a separate entity from the sponsor. In total, by 2001, Enron had used hundreds of special purpose entities to hide its debt. The company used a number of special purpose entities, such as partnerships in its Thomas and Condor tax shelters, financial asset securitization investment trusts (FASITs) in the Apache deal, real estate mortgage investment conduits (REMICs) in the Steele deal, and REMICs and real estate investment trusts (REITs) in the Cochise deal.

The special purpose entities were Tobashi schemes used for more than just circumventing accounting conventions. As a result of one violation, Enron's balance sheet understated its liabilities and overstated its equity , and its earnings were overstated. Enron disclosed to its shareholders that it had hedged downside risk in its own illiquid investments using special purpose entities. However, investors were oblivious to the fact that the special purpose entities were actually using the company's own stock and financial guarantees to finance these hedges. This prevented Enron from being protected from the downside risk.

In 1993, Enron established a joint venture in energy investments with CalPERS , the California state pension fund, called the Joint Energy Development Investments (JEDI). In 1997, Skilling, serving as Enron's chief operating officer (COO), asked CalPERS to join Enron in a separate investment. CalPERS was interested in the idea, but only if it could be terminated as a partner in JEDI. However, Enron did not want to show any debt from assuming CalPERS' stake in JEDI on its balance sheet. Chief Financial Officer (CFO) Fastow developed the special purpose entity Chewco Investments, a limited partnership (L.P.) that raised debt guaranteed by Enron and was used to acquire CalPERS's joint venture stake for $383 million. Because of Fastow's organization of Chewco, JEDI's losses were kept off of Enron's balance sheet.

In autumn of 2001, CalPERS and Enron's arrangement was discovered, which required the discontinuation of Enron's prior accounting method for Chewco and JEDI. This disqualification revealed that Enron's reported earnings from 1997 to mid-2001 would need to be reduced by $405 million and that the company's indebtedness would increase by $628 million.

Whitewing was the name of a special purpose entity used as a financing method by Enron. In December 1997, with funding of $579 million provided by Enron and $500 million by an outside investor, Whitewing Associates L.P. was formed. Two years later, the entity's arrangement was changed so that it would no longer be consolidated with Enron and be counted on the company's balance sheet. Whitewing was used to purchase Enron assets, including stakes in power plants, pipelines, stocks, and other investments. Between 1999 and 2001, Whitewing bought assets from Enron worth $2 billion, using Enron stock as collateral . Although the transactions were approved by the Enron board, the asset transfers were not true sales and should have been treated instead as loans.

In 1999, Fastow formulated two limited partnerships: LJM Cayman. L.P. (LJM1) and LJM2 Co-Investment L.P. (LJM2), to buy Enron's poorly performing stocks and stakes to improve its financial statements. LJM 1 and 2 were created solely to serve as the outside equity investor needed for the special purpose entities that were being used by Enron. Fastow had to go before the board of directors to receive an exemption from Enron's code of ethics (as he had the title of CFO) in order to manage the companies. The two partnerships were funded with around $390 million provided by Wachovia , J.P. Morgan Chase , Credit Suisse First Boston , Citigroup , and other investors. Merrill Lynch, which marketed the equity, also contributed $22 million to fund the entities.

Enron transferred to "Raptor I-IV", four LJM-related special purpose entities named after the velociraptors in Jurassic Park , more than "$1.2 billion in assets, including millions of shares of Enron common stock and long-term rights to purchase millions more shares, plus $150 million of Enron notes payable " as disclosed in the company's financial statement footnotes. The special purpose entities had been used to pay for all of this using the entities' debt instruments . The footnotes also declared that the instruments' face amount totaled $1.5 billion, and the entities notional amount of $2.1 billion had been used to enter into derivative contracts with Enron.

Enron capitalized the Raptors, and, in a manner similar to the accounting employed when a company issues stock at a public offering , then booked the notes payable issued as assets on its balance sheet while increasing the shareholders' equity for the same amount. This treatment later became an issue for Enron and its auditor Arthur Andersen , as removing it from the balance sheet resulted in a $1.2 billion decrease in net shareholders' equity.

Eventually, the derivative contracts worth $2.1 billion lost significant value. Swaps were established at the time the stock price achieved its maximum. During the ensuing year, the value of the portfolio under the swaps fell by $1.1 billion as the stock prices decreased (the loss of value meant that the special purpose entities technically now owed Enron $1.1 billion by the contracts). Enron, using its mark-to-market accounting method, claimed a $500 million gain on the swap contracts in its 2000 annual report . The gain was responsible for offsetting its stock portfolio losses and was attributed to nearly a third of Enron's earnings for 2000 (before it was properly restated in 2001).

On paper, Enron had a model board of directors comprising predominantly outsiders with significant ownership stakes and a talented audit committee. In its 2000 review of best corporate boards, Chief Executive included Enron among its five best boards. Even with its complex corporate governance and network of intermediaries, Enron was still able to "attract large sums of capital to fund a questionable business model, conceal its true performance through a series of accounting and financing maneuvers, and hype its stock to unsustainable levels."

Although Enron's compensation and performance management system was designed to retain and reward its most valuable employees, the system contributed to a dysfunctional corporate culture that became obsessed with short-term earnings to maximize bonuses. Employees constantly tried to start deals, often disregarding the quality of cash flow or profits, in order to get a better rating for their performance review. Additionally, accounting results were recorded as soon as possible to keep up with the company's stock price. This practice helped ensure deal-makers and executives received large cash bonuses and stock options.

Enron was constantly emphasizing its stock price. Management was compensated extensively using stock options , similar to other U.S. companies. This policy of stock option awards caused management to create expectations of rapid growth in efforts to give the appearance of reported earnings to meet Wall Street's expectations. Stock tickers were installed in lobbies, elevators, and on company computers. At budget meetings, Skilling would develop target earnings by asking, "What earnings do you need to keep our stock price up?" and that number would be used, even if it was not feasible. On December 31, 2000, Enron had 96 million shares outstanding as stock option plans (approximately 13% of common shares outstanding). Enron's proxy statement stated that, within three years, these awards were expected to be exercised. Using Enron's January 2001 stock price of $83.13 and the directors' beneficial ownership reported in the 2001 proxy, the value of director stock ownership was $659 million for Lay, and $174 million for Skilling.

Skilling believed that if Enron employees were constantly worried about cost, it would hinder original thinking. As a result, extravagant spending was rampant throughout the company, especially among the executives. Employees had large expense accounts and many executives were paid sometimes twice as much as competitors. In 1998, the top 200 highest-paid employees received $193 million from salaries, bonuses, and stock. Two years later, the figure jumped to $1.4 billion.

Before its demise, Enron was lauded for its sophisticated financial risk management tools. Risk management was crucial to Enron not only because of its regulatory environment, but also because of its business plan . Enron established long-term fixed commitments that needed to be hedged to prepare for the invariable fluctuation of future energy prices. Enron's downfall was attributed to its reckless use of derivatives and special purpose entities. By hedging its risks with special purpose entities that it owned, Enron retained the risks associated with the transactions. This arrangement had Enron implementing hedges with itself.

Enron's aggressive accounting practices were not hidden from the board of directors, as later learned by a Senate subcommittee. The board was informed of the rationale for using the Whitewing, LJM, and Raptor transactions, and after approving them, received status updates on the entities' operations. Although not all of Enron's widespread improper accounting practices were revealed to the board, the practices were dependent on board decisions. Even though Enron extensively relied on derivatives for its business, the company's finance committee and board did not have enough experience with derivatives to understand what they were being told. The Senate subcommittee argued that had there been a detailed understanding of how the derivatives were organized, the board would have prevented their use.

Enron's accounting firm, Arthur Andersen, was accused of applying reckless standards in its audits because of a conflict of interest over the significant consulting fees generated by Enron. During 2000, Andersen earned $25 million in audit fees and $27 million in consulting fees (this amount accounted for roughly 27% of the audit fees of public clients for Andersen's Houston office). The auditor's methods were questioned as either being completed solely to receive its annual fees or for its lack of expertise in properly reviewing Enron's revenue recognition, special entities, derivatives, and other accounting practices.

Enron hired numerous Certified Public Accountants (CPAs) as well as accountants who had worked on developing accounting rules with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). The accountants searched for new ways to save the company money, including capitalizing on loopholes found in Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), the accounting industry's standards. One Enron accountant revealed "We tried to aggressively use the literature [GAAP] to our advantage. All the rules create all these opportunities. We got to where we did because we exploited that weakness."

Andersen's auditors were pressured by Enron's management to defer recognizing the charges from the special purpose entities as its credit risks became known. Since the entities would never return a profit, accounting guidelines required that Enron should take a write-off , where the value of the entity was removed from the balance sheet at a loss. To pressure Andersen into meeting earnings expectations, Enron would occasionally allow accounting companies Ernst & Young or PricewaterhouseCoopers to complete accounting tasks to create the illusion of hiring a new company to replace Andersen. Although Andersen was equipped with internal controls to protect against conflicted incentives of local partners, it failed to prevent conflict of interest. In one case, Andersen's Houston office, which performed the Enron audit, was able to overrule any critical reviews of Enron's accounting decisions by Andersen's Chicago partner. In addition, after news of SEC investigations of Enron were made public, Andersen would later shred several tons of relevant documents and delete nearly 30,000 e-mails and computer files, leading to accusations of a cover-up.

Revelations concerning Andersen's overall performance led to the break-up of the firm, and to the following assessment by the Powers Committee (appointed by Enron's board to look into the firm's accounting in October 2001): "The evidence available to us suggests that Andersen did not fulfill its professional responsibilities in connection with its audits of Enron's financial statements, or its obligation to bring to the attention of Enron's Board (or the Audit and Compliance Committee) concerns about Enron's internal contracts over the related-party transactions".

Corporate audit committees usually meet just a few times during the year, and their members typically have only modest experience with accounting and finance. Enron's audit committee had more expertise than many others. It included:

Enron's audit committee was later criticized for its brief meetings that would cover large amounts of material. In one meeting on February 12, 2001, the committee met for an hour and a half. Enron's audit committee did not have the technical knowledge to question the auditors properly on accounting issues related to the company's special purpose entities. The committee was also unable to question the company's management due to pressures on the committee. The United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs ' report accused the board members of allowing conflicts of interest to impede their duties as monitoring the company's accounting practices. When Enron's scandal became public, the audit committee's conflicts of interest were regarded with suspicion.

Commentators attributed the mismanagement behind Enron's fall to a variety of ethical and political-economic causes. Ethical explanations centered on executive greed and hubris, a lack of corporate social responsibility, situation ethics, and get-it-done business pragmatism. Political-economic explanations cited post-1970s deregulation, and inadequate staff and funding for regulatory oversight.

Enron made a habit of booking costs of cancelled projects as assets, with the rationale that no official letter had stated that the project was cancelled. This method was known as "the snowball", and although it was initially dictated that such practices be used only for projects worth less than $90 million, it was later increased to $200 million.

In 1998, when analysts were given a tour of the Enron Energy Services office, they were impressed with how the employees were working so vigorously. In reality, Skilling had moved other employees to the office from other departments (instructing them to pretend to work hard) to create the appearance that the division was larger than it was. This ruse was used several times to fool analysts about the progress of different areas of Enron to help improve the stock price. [ citation needed ]

Enron division Azurix, slated for an IPO , initially planned to bid between $321 million and $353 million for the rights to operate water system services for areas around Buenos Aires . This was at the high end of what Enron's Risk Assessment and Control Group advised. But as pressure to outbid all others and win the deal grew more intense with the approaching IPO, the Azurix executives decided to up their bid. They eventually bid $438.6 million, which turned out to be about twice as much as the next highest sealed bid. But when Enron executives arrived at the Argentine facilities, they found them in shambles, with all of the customer records destroyed.

At the beginning of 2001, the Enron Corporation, the world's dominant energy trader, appeared unstoppable. The company's decade-long effort to persuade lawmakers to deregulate electricity markets had succeeded from California to New York. Its ties to the Bush administration assured that its views would be heard in Washington. Its sales, profits and stock were soaring.

On September 20, 2000, Jonathan Weil , a reporter at The Wall Street Journal bureau in Dallas wrote a story about how mark-to-market accounting had become prevalent in the energy industry. He noted that outsiders had no real way of knowing the assumptions on which companies that used mark-to-market based their earnings. While the story only appeared in the Texas Journal, the Texas regional edition of the Journal, short-seller Jim Chanos happened to read it and decided to check Enron's annual "10-K" financial report for himself. Chanos did not think it made sense that Enron's broadband unit appeared to far outpace a then-troubled broadband industry. He also noticed that Enron was spending much of its invested capital, and was alarmed by the large amounts of stock being sold by insiders. In November 2000, he decided to short Enron's stock.

In February 2001, Chief Accounting Officer Rick Causey told budget managers: "From an accounting standpoint, this will be our easiest year ever. We've got 2001 in the bag." On March 5, Bethany McLean 's Fortune article "Is Enron Overpriced?" questioned how Enron could maintain its high stock value, which was trading at 55 times its earnings, arguing that analysts and investors did not know exactly how the company made money. McLean was first drawn to the company's financial situation after Chanos suggested she view the company's 10-K for herself. In a post-mortem interview with The Washington Post , she recalled finding "strange transactions", "erratic cash flow", and "huge debt". The debt was the biggest red flag to McLean; she wondered how a supposedly profitable company could be "adding debt at such a rapid rate". Later, in her book, The Smartest Guys in the Room , McLean recalled speaking off the record with a number of people in the investment community who were growing skeptical about Enron.

McLean telephoned Skilling to discuss her findings prior to publishing the article, but he called her "unethical" for not properly researching his company. Fastow claimed that Enron could not reveal earnings details as the company had more than 1,200 trading books for assorted commodities and did "... not want anyone to know what's on those books. We don't want to tell anyone where we're making money."

In a conference call on April 17, 2001, then-Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Skilling verbally attacked Wall Street analyst Richard Grubman, who questioned Enron's unusual accounting practices during a recorded conference call. When Grubman complained that Enron was the only company that could not release a balance sheet along with its earnings statements, Skilling stammered, "Well uh ... Thank you very much, we appreciate it ... Asshole." This became an inside joke among many Enron employees, mocking Grubman for his perceived meddling rather than Skilling's offensiveness, with slogans such as, "Ask Why, Asshole", a variation on Enron's official slogan "Ask why".

By the late 1990s Enron's stock was trading for $80–90 per share, and few seemed to concern themselves with the opacity of the company's financial disclosures. In mid-July 2001, Enron reported revenues of $50.1 billion, almost triple year-to-date, and beating analysts' estimates by 3 cents a share. Despite this, Enron's profit margin had stayed at a modest average of about 2.1%, and its share price had decreased by more than 30% since the same quarter of 2000.

As time passed, a number of serious concerns confronted the company. Enron had recently faced several serious operational challenges, namely logistical difficulties in operating a new broadband communications trading unit, and the losses from constructing the Dabhol Power project, a large gas-powered power plant in India that had been mired in controversy since the beginning in relation to its high pricing and bribery at the highest level. These were subsequently confirmed in the 2002 Senate investigation. There was also increasing criticism of the company for the role that its subsidiary Enron Energy Services had in the California electricity crisis of 2000–2001. [ citation needed ]

There are no accounting issues, no trading issues, no reserve issues, no previously unknown problem issues. I think I can honestly say that the company is probably in the strongest and best shape that it has probably ever been in.

On August 14, Skilling announced he was resigning his position as CEO after only six months citing personal reasons. Observers noted that in the months before his exit, Skilling had sold at minimum 450,000 shares of Enron at a value of around $33 million (though he still owned over a million shares at the date of his departure). Nevertheless, Lay, who was serving as chairman at Enron, assured surprised market watchers that there would be "no change in the performance or outlook of the company going forward" from Skilling's departure. Lay announced he himself would re-assume the position of chief executive officer. [ citation needed ]

On August 15, Sherron Watkins , vice president for corporate development, sent an anonymous letter to Lay warning him about the company's accounting practices. One statement in the letter said: "I am incredibly nervous that we will implode in a wave of accounting scandals." Watkins contacted a friend who worked for Arthur Andersen and he drafted a memorandum to give to the audit partners about the points she raised. On August 22, Watkins met individually with Lay and gave him a six-page letter further explaining Enron's accounting issues. Lay questioned her as to whether she had told anyone outside of the company and then vowed to have the company's law firm, Vinson & Elkins , review the issues, despite Watkins arguing that using the law firm would present a conflict of interest. Lay consulted with other executives, and although they wanted to dismiss Watkins (as Texas law did not protect company whistleblowers ), they decided against it to prevent a lawsuit.

On October 15, Vinson & Elkins announced that Enron had done nothing wrong in its accounting practices as Andersen had approved each issue.

Something is rotten with the state of Enron.

By the end of August 2001, his company's stock value still falling, Lay named Greg Whalley, president and COO of Enron Wholesale Services, to succeed Skilling as president and COO of the entire company. He also named Mark Frevert as vice chairman, and appointed Whalley and Frevert to positions in the chairman's office. Some observers suggested that Enron's investors were in significant need of reassurance, not only because the company's business was difficult to understand (even "indecipherable") but also because it was difficult to properly describe the company in financial statements. One analyst stated "it's really hard for analysts to determine where [Enron] are making money in a given quarter and where they are losing money." Lay accepted that Enron's business was very complex, but asserted that analysts would "never get all the information they want" to satisfy their curiosity. He also explained that the complexity of the business was due largely to tax strategies and position-hedging. Lay's efforts seemed to meet with limited success; by September 9, one prominent hedge fund manager noted that "[Enron] stock is trading under a cloud." The sudden departure of Skilling combined with the opacity of Enron's accounting books made proper assessment difficult for Wall Street. In addition, the company admitted to repeatedly using "related-party transactions", which some feared could be too easily used to transfer losses that might otherwise appear on Enron's own balance sheet. A particularly troubling aspect of this technique was that several of the "related-party" entities had been or were being controlled by CFO Fastow.

After the September 11 attacks , media attention shifted away from the company and its troubles. A little less than a month later, Enron announced its intention to begin the process of selling its lower-margin assets in favor of its core businesses of gas and electricity trading. This policy included selling Portland General Electric to another Oregon utility, Northwest Natural Gas , for about $1.9 billion in cash and stock, and possibly selling its 65% stake in the Dabhol project in India.

On October 16, 2001, Enron announced that restatements to its financial statements for years 1997 to 2000 were necessary to correct accounting violations. The restatements for the period reduced earnings by $613 million (or 23% of reported profits during the period), increased liabilities at the end of 2000 by $628 million (6% of reported liabilities and 5.5% of reported equity), and reduced equity at the end of 2000 by $1.2 billion (10% of reported equity). Additionally, in January Skilling had asserted that the broadband unit alone was worth $35 billion, a claim also mistrusted. An analyst at Standard & Poor's said, "I don't think anyone knows what the broadband operation is worth."

Enron's management team claimed the losses were mostly due to investment losses, along with charges such as about $180 million in money spent restructuring the company's troubled broadband trading unit. In a statement, Lay said, "After a thorough review of our businesses, we have decided to take these charges to clear away issues that have clouded the performance and earnings potential of our core energy businesses." Some analysts were unnerved. David Fleischer at Goldman Sachs, an analyst termed previously 'one of the company's strongest supporters' asserted that the Enron management "... lost credibility and have to reprove themselves. They need to convince investors these earnings are real, that the company is for real and that growth will be realized."

Fastow disclosed to Enron's board of directors on October 22 that he earned $30 million from compensation arrangements when managing the LJM limited partnerships. That day, the share price of Enron decreased to $20.65, down $5.40 in one day, after the announcement by the SEC that it was investigating several suspicious deals struck by Enron, characterizing them as "some of the most opaque transactions with insiders ever seen". Attempting to explain the billion-dollar charge and calm investors, Enron's disclosures spoke of "share settled costless collar arrangements", "derivative instruments which eliminated the contingent nature of existing restricted forward contracts ," and strategies that served "to hedge certain merchant investments and other assets." Such puzzling phraseology left many analysts feeling ignorant about just how Enron managed its business. Regarding the SEC investigation, chairman and CEO Lay said, "We will cooperate fully with the SEC and look forward to the opportunity to put any concern about these transactions to rest."

Two days later, on October 25, Fastow was removed as CFO, despite Lay's assurances as early as the previous day that he and the board had confidence in him. In announcing Fastow's ouster, Lay said, "In my continued discussions with the financial community, it became clear to me that restoring investor confidence would require us to replace Andy as CFO." The move came after several banks refused to issue loans to Enron as long as Fastow remained CFO. However, with Skilling and Fastow now both departed, some analysts feared that revealing the company's practices would be made all the more difficult. Enron's stock was now trading at $16.41, having lost half its value in a little more than a week.

Jeff McMahon, head of industrial markets, succeeded Fastow as CFO. His first task was to deal with a cash crisis. A day earlier, Enron discovered that it was unable to roll its commercial paper , effectively losing access to several billion dollars in financing. The company had actually experienced difficulty selling its commercial paper for a week, but was now unable to sell even overnight paper. On October 27 the company began buying back all its commercial paper, valued at around $3.3 billion, in an effort to calm investor fears about Enron's supply of cash. Enron financed the re-purchase by depleting its lines of credit at several banks. While the company's debt rating was still considered investment-grade , its bonds were trading at levels slightly less, making future sales problematic. It soon emerged that Fastow had been so focused on creating off-balance sheet vehicles that he had all but ignored some of the most rudimentary aspects of corporate finance. McMahon and a "financial SWAT team" put together to find a way out of the cash crisis discovered that under Fastow's watch, Enron only operated on a quarterly basis. Fastow never developed procedures for tracking cash or debt maturities that were common for companies of Enron's stature. For all intents and purposes, Enron was illiquid.

As the month came to a close, serious concerns were being raised by some observers regarding Enron's possible manipulation of accepted accounting rules; however, analysis was claimed to be impossible based on the incomplete information provided by Enron. Industry analysts feared that Enron was the new Long-Term Capital Management , the hedge fund whose bankruptcy in 1998 threatened systemic failure of the international financial markets. Enron's tremendous presence worried some about the consequences of the company's possible bankruptcy. Enron executives accepted questions in written form only.

The main short-term danger to Enron's survival at the end of October 2001 seemed to be its credit rating. It was reported at the time that Moody's and Fitch , two of the three biggest credit-rating agencies, had slated Enron for review for possible downgrade. Such a downgrade would force Enron to issue millions of shares of stock to cover loans it had guaranteed, which would decrease the value of existing stock further. Additionally, all manner of companies began reviewing their existing contracts with Enron, especially in the long term, in the event that Enron's rating were lowered below investment grade, a possible hindrance for future transactions.

Analysts and observers continued their complaints regarding the difficulty or impossibility of properly assessing a company whose financial statements were so cryptic. Some feared that no one at Enron apart from Skilling and Fastow could completely explain years of mysterious transactions. "You're getting way over my head", said Lay during late August 2001 in response to detailed questions about Enron's business, a reaction that worried analysts.

On October 29, responding to growing concerns that Enron might have insufficient cash on hand, news spread that Enron was seeking a further $1–2 billion in financing from banks. The next day, as feared, Moody's lowered Enron's credit rating from Baa1 to Baa2, two levels above junk status . Standard & Poor's affirmed Enron's rating of BBB+, the equivalent of Moody's Baa1. Moody's also warned that it would downgrade Enron's commercial paper rating, the consequence of which would likely prevent the company from finding the further financing it sought to keep solvent.

November began with the disclosure that the SEC was now pursuing a formal investigation, prompted by questions related to Enron's dealings with "related parties". Enron's board also announced that it would commission a special committee to investigate the transactions, directed by William C. Powers , the dean of the University of Texas law school. The next day, an editorial in The New York Times demanded an "aggressive" investigation into the matter. Enron was able to secure an additional $1 billion in financing from cross-town rival Dynegy on November 2, but the news was not universally admired in that the debt was secured by assets from the company's valuable Northern Natural Gas and Transwestern Pipeline .

Sources claimed that Enron was planning to explain its business practices more fully within the coming days, as a confidence-building gesture. Enron's stock was now trading at around $7, and by this time it was obvious that Enron could not stay independent. However, investors worried that the company would not be able to find a buyer. [ citation needed ]

After Enron had received a wide spectrum of rejections, Enron management apparently found a buyer when the board of Dynegy, another energy trader based in Houston, voted late at night on November 7 to acquire Enron at a very low price of about $8 billion in stock. Chevron Texaco , which at the time owned about a quarter of Dynegy, agreed to provide Enron with $2.5 billion in cash, specifically $1 billion at first and the rest when the deal was completed. Dynegy would also be required to assume nearly $13 billion of debt, plus any other debt hitherto occluded by the Enron management's secretive business practices, possibly as much as $10 billion in "hidden" debt. Dynegy and Enron confirmed their deal on November 8, 2001. [ citation needed ]

With Enron in a state of near collapse, the deal was largely on Dynegy's terms. Dynegy would be the surviving company, and Dynegy CEO Charles Watson and his management team would head the merged company. Enron shareholders would get a 40 percent stake in the enlarged Dynegy, and Enron would get three seats on the merged company's board. Lay would not have any management role, though it was presumed he would get one of Enron's seats on the board. Of Enron's senior executives, only Whalley would join the merged company's C-suite, as an executive vice president. Dynegy agreed to invest $1.5 billion into Enron to keep it alive until the deal closed.

As a measure of how dire Enron's financial picture had become, the company initially balked at paying its bills for November until the credit agencies gave the merger their blessing and allowed Enron to keep its credit at investment grade. By this time, the Dynegy deal was virtually the only thing keeping the company alive, and Enron officials wanted to keep as much cash in the company's coffers in the event of bankruptcy. Had the credit agencies balked at the deal and reduced Enron to junk status, its ability to trade would be severely limited if there was a reduction or elimination of its credit lines with competitors. Ultimately, after Enron and Dynegy retooled the deal to make it harder for Dynegy to trigger the "material adverse change" clause and pull out, Moody's and S&P agreed to drop Enron to one notch above junk status, allowing Enron to pay its bills one day late with interest.

Commentators remarked on the different corporate cultures between Dynegy and Enron, and on Watson's "straight-talking" personality. Some wondered if Enron's troubles had not simply been the result of innocent accounting errors. By November, Enron was asserting that the billion-plus "one-time charges" disclosed in October should in reality have been $200 million, with the rest of the amount simply corrections of dormant accounting mistakes. Many feared other "mistakes" and restatements might yet be revealed.

Another major correction of Enron's earnings was announced on November 9, with a reduction of $591 million of the stated revenue of years 1997–2000. The charges were said to come largely from two special purpose partnerships (JEDI and Chewco). The corrections resulted in the virtual elimination of profit for fiscal year 1997, with significant reductions for the other years. Despite this disclosure, Dynegy declared it still intended to purchase Enron. Both companies were said to be anxious to receive an official assessment of the proposed sale from Moody's and S&P presumably to understand the effect the completion of any buyout transaction would have on Dynegy and Enron's credit rating. In addition, concerns were raised regarding antitrust regulatory restrictions resulting in possible divestiture , along with what to some observers were the radically different corporate cultures of Enron and Dynegy.

Both companies promoted the deal aggressively, and some observers were hopeful; Watson was praised for attempting to create the largest company on the energy market. At the time, Watson said: "We feel [Enron] is a very solid company with plenty of capacity to withstand whatever happens the next few months." One analyst called the deal "a whopper ... a very good deal financially, certainly should be a good deal strategically, and provides some immediate balance-sheet backstop for Enron."

Credit issues were becoming more critical, however. Around the time the buyout was made public, Moody's and S&P publicly announced that they had reduced Enron to just above junk status. In a conference call, S&P affirmed that, were Enron not to be bought, S&P would reduce its rating to low BB or high B, ratings noted as being within junk status. Additionally, many traders had limited their involvement with Enron, or stopped doing business altogether, fearing more bad news. Watson again attempted to re-assure, attesting at a presentation to investors that there was "nothing wrong with Enron's business". He also acknowledged that remunerative steps (in the form of more stock options) would have to be taken to redress the animosity of many Enron employees towards management after it was revealed that Lay and other officials had sold hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of stock during the months prior to the crisis. The situation was not helped by the disclosure that Lay, his "reputation in tatters", stood to receive a payment of $60 million as a change-of-control fee subsequent to the Dynegy acquisition, while many Enron employees had seen their retirement accounts, which were based largely on Enron stock, ravaged as the price decreased 90% in a year. An official at a company owned by Enron stated "We had some married couples who both worked who lost as much as $800,000 or $900,000. It pretty much wiped out every employee's savings plan."

Watson assured investors that the true nature of Enron's business had been made apparent to him: "We have comfort there is not another shoe to drop. If there is no shoe, this is a phenomenally good transaction." Watson further asserted that Enron's energy trading part alone was worth the price Dynegy was paying for the whole company.

By mid-November, Enron announced it was planning to sell about $8 billion worth of underperforming assets, along with a general plan to reduce its scale for the sake of financial stability. On November 19 Enron disclosed to the public further evidence of its critical state of affairs, most pressingly that the company had debt repayment obligations in the range of $9 billion by the end of 2002. Such debts were "vastly in excess" of its available cash. Also, the success of measures to preserve its solvency were not guaranteed, specifically as regarded asset sales and debt refinancing. In a statement, Enron revealed "An adverse outcome with respect to any of these matters would likely have a material adverse impact on Enron's ability to continue as a going concern."

Two days later, on November 21, Wall Street expressed serious doubts that Dynegy would proceed with its deal at all, or would seek to radically renegotiate. Furthermore, Enron revealed in a 10-Q filing that almost all the money it had recently borrowed for purposes including buying its commercial paper, or about $5 billion, had been exhausted in just 50 days. Analysts were unnerved at the revelation, especially since Dynegy was reported to have also been unaware of Enron's rate of cash use. In order to end the proposed buyout, Dynegy would need to legally demonstrate a "material change" in the circumstances of the transaction; as late as November 22, sources close to Dynegy were skeptical that the latest revelations constituted sufficient grounds. Indeed, while Lay assumed that one of his underlings had shared the 10-Q with Dynegy officials, no one at Dynegy saw it until it was released to the public. It subsequently emerged that Enron's traders had grabbed much of the money from Dynegy's cash infusion and used it to guarantee payment to their trading partners when it came time to settle up.

The SEC announced it had filed civil fraud complaints against Andersen. A few days later, sources claimed Enron and Dynegy were renegotiating the terms of their arrangement. Dynegy now demanded Enron agree to be bought for $4 billion rather than the previous $8 billion. Observers were reporting difficulties in ascertaining which of Enron's operations, if any, were profitable. Reports described an en masse shift of business to Enron's competitors for the sake of risk exposure reduction.

On November 28, 2001, Enron's two worst possible outcomes came true. Credit rating agencies all reduced Enron's credit rating to junk status, and Dynegy's board rejected the merger agreement on Watson's advice. Watson later said, "At the end, you couldn't give it [Enron] to me." Although they had seemingly ironed out a number of outstanding issues at a meeting in New York over the previous weekend, ultimately Dynegy's concerns about Enron's liquidity and dwindling business proved insurmountable. The company had very little cash with which to operate, let alone satisfy enormous debts. Its stock price fell to $0.61 at the end of the day's trading. One editorial observer wrote that "Enron is now shorthand for the perfect financial storm."

Systemic consequences were felt, as Enron's creditors and other energy trading companies suffered the loss of several percentage points. Some analysts felt Enron's failure indicated the risks of the post-September 11 economy, and encouraged traders to lock in profits where they could. The question now became how to determine the total exposure of the markets and other traders to Enron's failure. Early calculations estimated $18.7 billion. One adviser stated, "We don't really know who is out there exposed to Enron's credit. I'm telling my clients to prepare for the worst."

Within 24 hours, speculation abounded that Enron would have no choice but to file for bankruptcy. Enron was estimated to have about $23 billion in liabilities from both debt outstanding and guaranteed loans. Citigroup and JP Morgan Chase in particular appeared to have significant amounts to lose with Enron's bankruptcy. Additionally, many of Enron's major assets were pledged to lenders in order to secure loans, causing doubt about what, if anything, unsecured creditors and eventually stockholders might receive in bankruptcy proceedings. As it turned out, new corporate treasurer Ray Bowen had known as early as the day Dynegy pulled out of the deal that Enron was headed for bankruptcy. He spent most of the next two days scrambling to find a bank who would take Enron's remaining cash after pulling all of its money out of Citibank. He was ultimately forced to make do with a small Houston bank.

By the close of business on November 30, 2001, it was obvious Enron was at the end of its tether. [ tone ] That day, Enron Europe, the holding company for Enron's operations in continental Europe , filed for bankruptcy. The rest of Enron followed suit the following night, December 1, when the board voted unanimously to file for Chapter 11 protection. It became the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history, surpassing the 1970 bankruptcy of the Penn Central ( WorldCom 's bankruptcy the next year surpassed Enron's bankruptcy so the title was short held), and resulted in 4,000 lost jobs. The day that Enron filed for bankruptcy, thousands of employees were told to pack their belongings and given 30 minutes to vacate the building. Nearly 62% of 15,000 employees' savings plans relied on Enron stock that was purchased at $83 in early 2001 and was now practically worthless.

In its accounting work for Enron, Andersen had been sloppy and weak. But that's how Enron had always wanted it. In truth, even as they angrily pointed fingers, the two deserved each other.

On January 17, 2002, Enron dismissed Arthur Andersen as its auditor, citing its accounting advice and the destruction of documents. Andersen countered that it had already ended its relationship with the company when Enron became bankrupt.

Fastow and his wife, Lea, both pleaded guilty to charges against them. Fastow was initially charged with 98 counts of fraud, money laundering , insider trading , and conspiracy, among other crimes. Fastow pleaded guilty to two charges of conspiracy and was sentenced to ten years with no parole in a plea bargain to testify against Lay, Skilling, and Causey. Lea was indicted on six felony counts, but prosecutors later dismissed them in favor of a single misdemeanor tax charge. Lea was sentenced to one year for helping her husband hide income from the government.

Lay and Skilling went on trial for their part in the Enron scandal in January 2006. The 53-count, 65-page indictment covered a broad range of financial crimes, including bank fraud, making false statements to banks and auditors, securities fraud, wire fraud, money laundering, conspiracy, and insider trading. United States District Judge Sim Lake had previously denied motions by the defendants to have separate trials and to relocate the case out of Houston, where the defendants argued the negative publicity concerning Enron's demise would make it impossible to get a fair trial. On May 25, 2006, the jury in the Lay and Skilling trial returned its verdicts. Skilling was convicted of 19 of 28 counts of securities fraud and wire fraud and acquitted on the remaining nine, including charges of insider trading. He was sentenced to 24 years and 4 months in prison. In 2013 the United States Department of Justice reached a deal with Skilling, which resulted in ten years being cut from his sentence.

Lay pleaded not guilty to the eleven criminal charges, and claimed that he was misled by those around him. He attributed the main cause for the company's demise to Fastow. Lay was convicted of all six counts of securities and wire fraud for which he had been tried, and he was subject to a maximum total sentence of 45 years in prison. However, before sentencing was scheduled, Lay died on July 5, 2006. At the time of his death, the SEC had been seeking more than $90 million from Lay in addition to civil fines. Linda Lay sold roughly 500,000 shares of Enron ten minutes to thirty minutes before the information that Enron was collapsing went public on November 28, 2001. Linda was never charged with any of the events related to Enron.

Although Michael Kopper worked at Enron for more than seven years, Lay did not know of Kopper even after the company's bankruptcy. Kopper was able to keep his name anonymous in the entire affair. Kopper was the first Enron executive to plead guilty. Rick Causey was indicted with six felony charges for disguising Enron's financial condition during his tenure. After pleading not guilty, he later switched to guilty and was sentenced to seven years in prison.

All told, sixteen people pleaded guilty for crimes committed at the company, and five others, including four former Merrill Lynch employees (three of whose convictions were subsequently overturned on appeal), were found guilty. Eight former Enron executives testified—the main witness being Fastow—against Lay and Skilling, his former bosses. Another was Kenneth Rice, the former chief of Enron Corp.'s high-speed Internet unit, who cooperated and whose testimony helped convict Skilling and Lay. In June 2007, he received a 27-month sentence.

Michael W. Krautz, a former Enron accountant, was among the accused who was acquitted of charges related to the scandal. Represented by Barry Pollack, Krautz was acquitted of federal criminal fraud charges after a month-long jury trial.

Arthur Andersen was found guilty of obstruction of justice on June 15, 2002 for shredding the thousands of documents and deleting emails and company files that tied the firm to its audit of Enron.

Legal department member Nancy Temple and David Duncan , the lead partner for the Enron account, were cited as the responsible managers in the scandal because they ordered subordinates to shred relevant documents. Duncan himself pleaded guilty in federal court in Houston to obstruction of justice on April 10, 2002, saying that he had ordered the destruction of documents and also personally destroyed documents.

Although only a small number of Arthur Andersen's employees were involved with the scandal, the firm was effectively put out of business; the SEC is not allowed to accept audits from convicted felons. The company surrendered its CPA license on August 31, 2002, and 85,000 employees lost their jobs. The conviction was later overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court due to the jury not being properly instructed on the charge against Andersen. The Supreme Court ruling theoretically left Andersen free to resume operations. However, the damage done to the Andersen name was so great (not just from the Enron scandal but others involving Andersen accounting malpractice such as WorldCom a year after Enron) that it did not return as a viable business even on a limited scale in the years after the ruling.

However, in 2014, Wealth Tax and Advisory Services (WTAS), a tax and consulting firm started by several former Andersen partners, changed its name to Andersen Tax after acquiring the rights to the Andersen name. It also rebranded its year-old international arm from WTAS Global to Andersen Global.

Giles Darby, David Bermingham, and Gary Mulgrew worked for Greenwich NatWest . The three British men had worked with Fastow on a special purpose entity he had started called Swap Sub. When Fastow was being investigated by the SEC, the three men met with the British Financial Services Authority (FSA) in November 2001 to discuss their interactions with Fastow. In June 2002, the U.S. issued warrants for their arrest on seven counts of wire fraud, and they were then extradited. On July 12, a potential Enron witness scheduled to be extradited to the U.S., Neil Coulbeck , was found dead in a park in north-east London. Coulbeck's death was eventually ruled to have been a suicide. In a plea bargain in November 2007, the trio pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud while the other six counts were dismissed. Darby, Bermingham, and Mulgrew were each sentenced to 37 months in prison. In August 2010, Bermingham and Mulgrew retracted their confessions.

While some employees, like John D. Arnold , received large bonuses in the final days of the company, Enron's shareholders lost $74 billion in the four years before the company's bankruptcy ($40 to $45 billion of this was attributed to fraud), and they received little compensation in the aftermath besides severance pay because nearly $67 billion was owed to creditors. To pay its creditors, Enron was legally ordered to sell assets including art, photographs, logo signs, and its pipelines.

A class action lawsuit on behalf of about 20,000 Enron employees who alleged mismanagement of their 401(k) plans resulted in a July 2005 settlement of $356 million against Enron and 401(k) manager Northern Trust . A year later the settlement was reduced to $37.5 million in an agreement by federal judge Melinda Harmon , with Northern Trust neither admitting or denying wrongdoing.

In May 2004, more than 20,000 of Enron's former employees won a suit of $85 million for compensation of $2 billion that was lost from their pensions. From the settlement, the employees each received about $3,100. The next year, investors received another settlement from several banks of $4.2 billion. In September 2008, a $7.2-billion settlement from a $40-billion lawsuit, was reached on behalf of the shareholders. The settlement was distributed among the main plaintiff, University of California (UC), and 1.5 million individuals and groups. UC's law firm Coughlin Stoia Geller Rudman and Robbins , received $688 million in fees, the highest in a U.S. securities fraud case. At the distribution, UC announced in a press release "We are extremely pleased to be returning these funds to the members of the class. Getting here has required a long, challenging effort, but the results for Enron investors are unprecedented."

In the Titanic , the captain went down with the ship . And Enron looks to me like the captain first gave himself and his friends a bonus, then lowered himself and the top folks down the lifeboat and then hollered up and said, "By the way, everything is going to be just fine."

Between December 2001 and April 2002, the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and the House Committee on Financial Services held multiple hearings about the Enron scandal and related accounting and investor protection issues. These hearings and the corporate scandals that followed Enron led to the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on July 30, 2002. The Act is nearly "a mirror image of Enron: the company's perceived corporate governance failings are matched virtually point for point in the principal provisions of the Act."

The main provisions of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act included the establishment of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board to develop standards for the preparation of audit reports ; the restriction of public accounting companies from providing any non-auditing services when auditing; provisions for the independence of audit committee members, executives being required to sign off on financial reports, and relinquishment of certain executives' bonuses in case of financial restatements; and expanded financial disclosure of companies' relationships with unconsolidated entities.

On February 13, 2002, due to the instances of corporate malfeasances and accounting violations, the SEC recommended changes of the stock exchanges' regulations. In June 2002, the New York Stock Exchange announced a new governance proposal, which was approved by the SEC in November 2003. The main provisions of the final NYSE proposal include:

Kenneth Lay was a longtime supporter of U.S. president George W. Bush and a donor to his various political campaigns, including his successful bid for the presidency in 2000 . As such, critics of Bush and his administration attempted to link them to the scandal.  A January 2002 article in The Economist claimed that Lay had been a close personal friend of Bush's family and had backed him financially since his unsuccessful campaign for Congress in 1978 .  Allegedly, Lay was even rumored at one point to be in the running to serve as Secretary of Energy for Bush.

In an article that same month, Time magazine accused the Bush administration of making desperate attempts to distance themselves from the scandal.  According to author Frank Pellegrini, various Bush appointments held connections to Enron, including deputy White House Chief of Staff Karl Rove as a stockholder, Secretary of the Army Thomas E. White Jr. as a former executive, and SEC chairman Harvey Pitt , a former employee of Arthur Andersen. Former Montana governor Marc Racicot , whom Bush considered for appointment for Secretary of the Interior , briefly served as a lobbyist for the company after leaving office.  After opening a criminal investigation into the scandal, Attorney General John Ashcroft recused himself and his chief of staff from the case when Democratic Congressman Henry Waxman accused Ashcroft of receiving $25,000 from Enron for his failed reelection campaign to the Senate in 2000 . As Pellegrini wrote, "The Democrats will have the company-he-keeps, guilt-by-association thing on their side, and with all the ... general whiff of rich man's cover-up about the whole affair, they'll have a class warfare card to play this spring."

Ken Lay had made phone calls to then-Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill .

The Sopranos is an American crime drama television series created by David Chase for HBO . The series follows Tony Soprano ( James Gandolfini ), a New Jersey Mafia boss who has panic attacks. He reluctantly begins seeing psychiatrist Dr. Jennifer Melfi ( Lorraine Bracco ), who encourages him to open up about his difficulties balancing his family life with his criminal life. Other important characters include Tony's family, Mafia colleagues, and rivals, most notably his wife Carmela ( Edie Falco ), his nephew and protégé Christopher Moltisanti ( Michael Imperioli ), and his uncle Corrado "Junior" Soprano ( Dominic Chianese ).

Having been greenlit in 1997, the series was broadcast on HBO from January 10, 1999, to June 10, 2007, spanning six seasons and 86 episodes . The show was broadcast as a part of HBO's newly launched Sunday night programming block . After its original HBO run, the series entered broadcast and cable syndication in the United States and other territories. The series was produced by HBO in association with Chase Films and Brad Grey Television. It was primarily filmed at Silvercup Studios in New York City , with some on-location filming in New Jersey. The executive producers throughout the show's run were Chase, Brad Grey , Robin Green , Mitchell Burgess , Ilene S. Landress , Terence Winter , and Matthew Weiner .

Widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential television series of all time , it has been credited by media commentators with ushering in the Second Golden Age of Television , marked by high-quality serialized dramas. The series won multiple awards , including Peabody Awards for its first two seasons, 21 Primetime Emmy Awards , and 5 Golden Globe Awards . The Sopranos has been the subject of extensive critical analysis and debate for its portrayal of organized crime and Italian-American identity, and has been referenced or parodied in other media, including a video game , soundtrack albums and podcasts. It has inspired tie-in merchandise. When the series premiered, several cast members had limited mainstream exposure; many subsequently received major award nominations or appeared in high-profile film and television roles.

In March 2018, New Line Cinema announced that they had purchased a film detailing the show's background story, set in the 1960s and 1970s during and after the Newark riots . The film, The Many Saints of Newark (2021), was written by Chase and Lawrence Konner and directed by Alan Taylor . It starred Gandolfini's son Michael Gandolfini as a young Tony Soprano.

The series follows Tony Soprano , a North Jersey -based Italian-American mobster, who tries to balance his family life with his role as the boss of the DiMeo crime family . Tony's career causes him frequent rage and anxiety , and, following a series of panic attacks , begins therapy with psychiatrist Dr. Jennifer Melfi , which becomes a central narrative thread. In Dr. Melfi's office, Tony slowly begins to open up about his emotional problems, even as his career continually leads him into dangerous and even life-threatening scenarios. He finds himself at odds with his wife Carmela , his uncle Junior , and other ambitious family members, as well as the Lupertazzi crime family of New York .

David Chase had worked as a television writer and producer for more than 20 years before creating The Sopranos . He had been employed as a staff writer or producer for several television series, including Kolchak: The Night Stalker , Switch , The Rockford Files , I'll Fly Away , and Northern Exposure . He had also co-created the series Almost Grown in 1988. He made his television directorial debut in 1986 with the "Enough Rope for Two" episode of Alfred Hitchcock Presents . He also directed episodes of Almost Grown and I'll Fly Away in 1988 and 1992, respectively. In 1996, he wrote and directed the television film The Rockford Files: Punishment and Crime . He served as showrunner for I'll Fly Away and Northern Exposure in the 1990s. Chase won his first Emmy Award in 1978 for his work on The Rockford Files (shared with fellow producers) and his second for writing the 1980 television film Off the Minnesota Strip . By 1996, he was a coveted showrunner.

I want to tell a story about this particular man. I want to tell the story about the reality of being a mobster—or what I perceive to be the reality of life in organized crime. They aren't shooting each other every day. They sit around eating baked ziti and betting and figuring out who owes who money. Occasionally, violence breaks out—more often than it does in the banking world, perhaps.

The story of The Sopranos was initially conceived as a feature film about "a mobster in therapy having problems with his mother". Chase got some input from his manager Lloyd Braun and decided to adapt it into a television series. He signed a development deal in 1995 with production company Brillstein-Grey and wrote the original pilot script. He drew heavily from his personal life and his experiences growing up in an Italian-American family in New Jersey, and has stated that he tried to apply his own "family dynamic to mobsters". For instance, the tumultuous relationship between series protagonist Tony Soprano and his mother Livia is partially based on Chase's relationship with his own mother. He was also in psychotherapy at the time and modeled the character of Jennifer Melfi after his own psychiatrist.

Chase had been fascinated by organized crime and the mafia from an early age, witnessing such people growing up. He also was raised on classic gangster films such as The Public Enemy and the crime series The Untouchables . The series is partly inspired by the Richard Boiardo family, a prominent New Jersey organized crime family when Chase was growing up, and partly on New Jersey's DeCavalcante family . He has mentioned American playwrights Arthur Miller and Tennessee Williams as influences on the show's writing, and Italian director Federico Fellini as an important influence on the show's cinematic style. The series was named after high school friends of his.

I said to myself, this show is about a guy who's turning 40. He's inherited a business from his dad. He's trying to bring it into the modern age. He's got all the responsibilities that go along with that. He's got an overbearing mom that he's still trying to get out from under. Although he loves his wife, he's had an affair. He's got two teenage kids, and he's dealing with the realities of what that is. He's anxious; he's depressed; he starts to see a therapist because he's searching for the meaning of his own life. I thought: the only difference between him and everybody I know is he's the Don of New Jersey.

Chase and producer Brad Grey pitched The Sopranos to several networks; Fox showed interest but passed on it after Chase presented them the pilot script. According to Chase, CBS was "fine with all the break-ins and crime" but asked, "does he have to go to a psychiatrist?" They eventually pitched the show to Chris Albrecht , president of HBO Original Programming, who decided to finance a pilot episode which was shot in 1997. Chase directed it himself. They finished the pilot and showed it to HBO executives, but the show was put on hold for several months.

During this time, Chase, who had experienced frustration for a long period with being unable to break out of the TV genre and into film, considered asking HBO for additional funding to shoot 45 more minutes of footage and release The Sopranos as a feature film. In December 1997, HBO decided to produce the series and ordered 12 more episodes for a 13-episode season. The show premiered on HBO on January 10, 1999, with the pilot, "The Sopranos" .

North Jersey prosecutor and municipal judge Robert Baer filed a breach of contract lawsuit against Chase in Trenton, New Jersey , federal court, alleging that he helped to create the show. Baer lost the suit, but he won a ruling that a jury should decide how much he should be paid for services as a location scout, researcher, and story consultant. Baer argued that he had introduced Chase to Tony Spirito, a restaurateur and gambler with alleged mob ties, and Thomas Koczur, a homicide detective for the Elizabeth, New Jersey police department. Chase had conducted interviews and tours with both, which strongly inspired some characters, settings, and storylines portrayed in The Sopranos . On December 19, 2007, a federal jury found against Baer, dismissing all of his claims.

Many of the actors on The Sopranos are Italian American, with many of them coming from the New York metropolitan area , like the characters they portray. Several have appeared together in films and television series before joining the cast of The Sopranos . The series has 27 actors in common with the 1990 Martin Scorsese gangster film Goodfellas , including main cast members Lorraine Bracco , Michael Imperioli , and Tony Sirico .

The casting directors were Georgianne Walken and Sheila Jaffe . The main cast was put together through a process of auditions and readings. Actors often did not know whether Chase liked their performances or not. Michael Imperioli beat out several actors for the part of Christopher Moltisanti ; he said that Chase had "a poker face, so I thought he wasn't into me, and he kept giving me notes and having me try it again, which often is a sign that you're not doing it right." Chase said that he wanted Imperioli because of his performance in Goodfellas.

James Gandolfini was invited to audition for the part of Tony Soprano after casting director Susan Fitzgerald saw a short clip of his performance in the 1993 film True Romance . Lorraine Bracco played the role of mob wife Karen Hill in Goodfellas , and she was originally asked to play the role of Carmela Soprano . She took the role of Dr. Jennifer Melfi instead because she wanted to try something different and felt that the part of the highly educated Dr. Melfi would be more of a challenge for her. Tony Sirico had a criminal history, and he signed on to play Paulie Walnuts so long as his character was not to be a " rat ". Sirico had originally auditioned for the role of Uncle Junior with Frank Vincent , but Dominic Chianese landed the role.

Chase was impressed with Steven Van Zandt 's humorous appearance and presence after seeing him induct The Rascals into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1997, and invited him to audition. Van Zandt, a guitarist in Bruce Springsteen 's E Street Band , had never acted before. He auditioned for the role of Tony Soprano, but HBO felt that the role should go to an experienced actor, so Chase wrote a new part for him. Van Zandt eventually agreed to star on the show as consigliere Silvio Dante , and his real-life spouse Maureen was cast as his on-screen wife Gabriella .

The cast of the debut season of the series consisted of largely unknown actors, with the exception of Bracco, Chianese, and Nancy Marchand , but many cast members were noted for their acting ability and received mainstream attention for their performances. Subsequent seasons saw established actors Joe Pantoliano , Robert Loggia , Steve Buscemi , and Frank Vincent join the starring cast, along with well-known actors in recurring roles such as Peter Bogdanovich , John Heard , Robert Patrick , Peter Riegert , Annabella Sciorra , and David Strathairn .

Numerous well-known actors appeared in one or two episodes, such as Lauren Bacall , Daniel Baldwin , Annette Bening , Polly Bergen , Sandra Bernhard , Paul Dano , Charles S. Dutton , Jon Favreau , Janeane Garofalo , Hal Holbrook , Tim Kang , Elias Koteas , Ben Kingsley , Linda Lavin , Ken Leung , Julianna Margulies , Sydney Pollack , Wilmer Valderrama , Alicia Witt , and Burt Young . Ray Liotta , who was eventually cast as two of the Moltisanti brothers in The Many Saints of Newark film prequel , was approached by Chase at one point to appear in the third or fourth seasons of the show, but the plan did not work out.

Series creator and executive producer David Chase served as showrunner and head writer for the production of all six seasons of the show. He was deeply involved with the general production of every episode and is noted for being a very controlling, demanding, and specific producer. He wrote or co-wrote between two and seven episodes per season and would oversee all the editing, consult with episode directors, give actors character motivation, approve casting choices and set designs, and do extensive but uncredited rewrites of episodes written by others. Brad Grey served as executive producer alongside Chase but had no creative input on the show. Many members of the creative team behind The Sopranos were handpicked by Chase, some being old friends and colleagues of his; others were selected after interviews conducted by producers of the show.

Many of the show's writers had worked in television before joining the writing staff of The Sopranos . The writing team and married couple Robin Green and Mitchell Burgess worked on the series as writers and producers from the first to the fifth season; they had previously worked with Chase on Northern Exposure . Terence Winter joined the writing staff during the production of the second season and served as executive producer from season five onwards. He practiced law for two years before deciding to pursue a career as a screenwriter, and he caught the attention of Chase through writer Frank Renzulli .

Matthew Weiner served as staff writer and producer for the show's fifth and sixth seasons. He wrote a script for the series Mad Men in 2000 which was passed on to Chase, who was so impressed that he immediately offered Weiner a job as a writer for The Sopranos . Cast members Michael Imperioli and Toni Kalem portray Christopher Moltisanti and Angie Bonpensiero respectively, and they also wrote episodes for the show. Imperioli wrote five episodes of seasons two through five, and Kalem wrote one episode of season five.

Other writers included Frank Renzulli, Todd A. Kessler (co-creator of Damages ), writing team Diane Frolov and Andrew Schneider who worked with Chase on Northern Exposure , and Lawrence Konner , who co-created Almost Grown with Chase in 1988. In total, 20 writers or writing teams are credited with writing episodes of The Sopranos . Of these, Tim Van Patten and Maria Laurino receive a single story credit, and eight others are credited with writing a sole episode. The most prolific writers of the series were Chase (30 credited episodes, including story credits), Winter (25 episodes), Green and Burgess (22 episodes), Weiner (12 episodes), and Renzulli (9 episodes).

Many of the directors had previously worked on television series and independent films. The most frequent directors of the series were Tim Van Patten (20 episodes), John Patterson (13 episodes), Allen Coulter (12 episodes), and Alan Taylor (9 episodes), all of whom have a background in television. Recurring cast members Steve Buscemi and Peter Bogdanovich also directed episodes of the series intermittently. Chase directed the pilot episode and the series finale . Both episodes were photographed by the show's original director of photography Alik Sakharov , who later alternated episodes with Phil Abraham . The show's photography and directing is noted for its feature film quality. This look was achieved by Chase collaborating with Sakharov. "From the pilot, we would sit down with the whole script and break the scenes down into shots. That's what you do with feature films."

The Sopranos is noted for its eclectic music selections and has received considerable critical attention for its effective use of previously recorded songs. Chase personally selected all of the show's music with producer Martin Bruestle and music editor Kathryn Dayak, sometimes also consulting Steven Van Zandt . The music was usually selected once the production and editing of an episode was completed, but on occasion sequences were filmed to match preselected pieces of music.

The show's opening theme is " Woke Up This Morning " (Chosen One Mix), written by, remixed and performed by British band Alabama 3 . With few exceptions, a different song plays over the closing credits of each episode. Many songs are repeated multiple times through an episode, such as " Living on a Thin Line " by The Kinks in the season three episode " University " and "Glad Tidings" by Van Morrison in the season five finale " All Due Respect ". Other songs are heard several times throughout the series. A notable example is " Con te partirò ", performed by Italian singer Andrea Bocelli , which plays several times in relation to the character of Carmela Soprano .
While the show utilizes a wealth of previously recorded music, it is also notable for its lack of originally composed incidental music , compared with other television programs.

Two soundtrack albums containing music from the series have been released. The first, titled The Sopranos: Music from the HBO Original Series , was released in 1999. It contains selections from the show's first two seasons and reached No. 54 on the U.S. Billboard 200 . A second soundtrack compilation titled The Sopranos – Peppers & Eggs: Music from the HBO Series , was released in 2001. This double-disc album contains songs and selected dialogue from the show's first three seasons. It reached No. 38 on the U.S. Billboard 200.

The ending to the show has drawn attention and sparked controversy. The song " Don't Stop Believin ' " by Journey plays at the end of the series finale. While Journey granted the rights to use the song in the ending of the series, their one request was that the scene not contain any violence or deaths.

The majority of the exterior scenes took place in New Jersey and were filmed on location, with the majority of the interior shots filmed at Silvercup Studios in New York City, including most indoor shots of the Soprano residence, the back room of the strip club Bada Bing! , and Dr. Melfi 's office. The pork store was called Centanni's Meat Market in the pilot episode, an actual butchery in Elizabeth, New Jersey . After the series was picked up by HBO, the producers leased a building with a storefront in Kearny, New Jersey which served as the shooting location for exterior and interior scenes for the remainder of production; renamed Satriale's Pork Store . After the series ended, the building was demolished.

The strip club Bada Bing! was owned and operated by Silvio Dante on the show, and is an actual strip club on Route 17 in Lodi, New Jersey . Exteriors and interiors were shot on location except for the back room. The club is called Satin Dolls and was an existing business before the show started. The club continued to operate during the eight years that the show was filmed there, and a business arrangement was worked out with the owner. Locations manager Mark Kamine recalls that the owner was "very gracious" as long as the shooting did not "conflict with his business time".

Scenes set at the restaurant Vesuvio, owned and operated in the series by character Artie Bucco , were filmed at a restaurant called Manolo's located in Elizabeth for the first episode. After the destruction of Vesuvio within the context of the series, Artie opened a new restaurant called Nuovo Vesuvio; exterior scenes set there were filmed at an Italian restaurant called Punta Dura located in Long Island City . All the exterior and some interior shots of the Soprano residence were filmed on location at a private residence in North Caldwell, New Jersey .

Tony Soprano is seen emerging from the Lincoln Tunnel out of Manhattan and passing through the tollbooth for the New Jersey Turnpike . Numerous landmarks in and around Newark and Jersey City, New Jersey , are then shown passing by the camera as Tony drives down the highway. The sequence ends with Tony pulling into the driveway of his suburban home. Chase has said that the goal of the title sequence was to show that this particular mafia show was about New Jersey , as opposed to New York, where most similar dramas have been set.

In the first three seasons, between Tony leaving the tunnel and passing through the toll plaza, the title sequence included a shot of the World Trade Center towers in the right side-view mirror. After the September 11 attacks , beginning with the show's fourth season, this shot was removed and replaced with a more generic view.

In a 2010 issue of TV Guide , the show's opening title sequence ranked No. 10 on a list of TV's top 10 credits sequences, as selected by readers.

A parody of the opening sequence was used in an episode of The Simpsons . In " Poppa's Got a Brand New Badge ", a variation on the sequence is used, with Fat Tony leaving a Springfield tunnel instead of Tony. Fat Tony then continues to drive through Springfield to the same soundtrack as the original.

Tony Soprano ( James Gandolfini ) is the series' protagonist . Tony is one of the capos of the New Jersey–based DiMeo crime family at the beginning of the series; he eventually becomes its undisputed boss. He is also the patriarch of the Soprano household. Throughout the series, Tony struggles to balance the needs of his Mafia family with those of his wife and children. Because he is prone to bouts of clinical depression and reflex syncope , after a fainting spell (triggered by a panic attack ), Tony's physician refers him for treatment by psychiatrist Dr. Jennifer Melfi ( Lorraine Bracco ) in the show's first episode .

Dr. Melfi treats Tony to the best of her ability, even though he is prone to violent, angry outbursts. Melfi is usually thoughtful, rational, and humane, which is a stark contrast to Tony's personality. Tony, a serial womanizer, divulges that he is attracted to Dr. Melfi. She harbors some degree of attraction to Tony too, but rarely admits it and never acts on it. Melfi is drawn to the challenge of helping such an unusual client and naively assumes that their doctor–patient relationship will not affect her personal life.

Adding to Tony's complicated life is his relationship with his wife Carmela ( Edie Falco ), which is strained by his constant infidelity and her struggle to reconcile her misgivings about Tony's business, whose existence she publicly denies, with the affluent lifestyle and higher social status it brings her. Tony and Carmela's style of parenting involves anger, criticism and yelling, and they have challenging relationships with their two children: the intelligent, but rebellious Meadow ( Jamie-Lynn Sigler ) and underachiever Anthony Jr. ("A.J.") ( Robert Iler ), whose everyday teenage issues are further complicated by their eventual knowledge of their father's criminal activities and reputation.

The starring cast includes members of Tony's extended family, including his narcissistic and manipulative mother, Livia ( Nancy Marchand ), his aimless, histrionic older sister Janice ( Aida Turturro ), his crafty paternal uncle Corrado "Junior" Soprano ( Dominic Chianese ), who is nominal boss of the crime family following the death of then-acting boss Jackie Aprile Sr. ( Michael Rispoli ), and his immature and hot-headed cousin and protégé Christopher Moltisanti ( Michael Imperioli ).

Both Livia and Janice are scheming, treacherous, shrewd manipulators with major unaddressed psychological issues of their own. Uncle Junior is ambitious, and he is chronically frustrated that he is not boss of the family, despite being entitled to the position by old-school mob traditions regarding seniority. He feels his authority is perpetually undermined by Tony's greater influence in the organization and barely contains his seething jealousy at having to watch both his younger brother (Tony's father) and now Tony leapfrog him in the organization. As their tensions escalate, Uncle Junior employs increasingly desperate behind-the-scenes measures to solve his problems with Tony, who still idolizes his uncle and wants to retain Junior's affection and approval.

Uncle Junior and Christopher are fixtures in Tony's real family, as well as his crime family, so their actions in one realm often create further conflicts in the other. Christopher, an entitled, insecure associate who is as ambitious as he is insubordinate and incompetent, is also a chronic substance abuser. His maternal cousin Tony Blundetto ( Steve Buscemi ) is a well-respected DiMeo family soldier who returns after completing a lengthy prison sentence; he leaves prison committed to "going straight" (to Tony's dismay), but also has an intense violent streak.

Those in Tony's closest circle within the crime family include Silvio Dante ( Steven Van Zandt ), Tony's consigliere and best friend who runs the family's strip club headquarters and other businesses, Paulie "Walnuts" Gualtieri ( Tony Sirico ), a tough, short-tempered, aging soldier who is fiercely loyal to Tony, and Salvatore "Big Pussy" Bonpensiero ( Vincent Pastore ), a veteran gangster who runs an automotive body shop . Paulie "Walnuts" and "Big Pussy" (often called just "Pussy") have worked with Tony and his father. Also in Tony's criminal organization are Patsy Parisi ( Dan Grimaldi ), a soft-spoken soldier with a head for figures, and Furio Giunta ( Federico Castelluccio ), an Italian national who joins the family later in the series, who serves as Tony's enforcer and bodyguard.

Other significant characters in the crime family include Bobby "Bacala" Baccalieri ( Steven R. Schirripa ); Richie Aprile ( David Proval ); Ralph Cifaretto ( Joe Pantoliano ); Eugene Pontecorvo ( Robert Funaro ); and Vito Spatafore ( Joseph R. Gannascoli ). Bobby is a subordinate of Uncle Junior's whom Tony initially bullies, but later accepts into his inner circle. Ralph is a clever, ambitious 'top-earner', but his arrogant, obnoxious, disrespectful, and unpredictably violent tendencies turn Tony resentful. Richie Aprile is released from prison in season 2 and quickly makes waves. Pontecorvo is a young soldier who becomes a "made" man alongside Christopher. Vito Spatafore works his way up through the ranks to become top earner of the Aprile crew but is secretly gay.

Friends of the Soprano family include Herman "Hesh" Rabkin ( Jerry Adler ); Adriana La Cerva ( Drea de Matteo ); Rosalie Aprile ( Sharon Angela ); Angie Bonpensiero ( Toni Kalem ), along with Artie ( John Ventimiglia ) and Charmaine Bucco ( Kathrine Narducci ). Hesh is an invaluable adviser and friend to Tony, as he was when Tony's father ran things. Adriana is Christopher's loyal and long-suffering girlfriend; the two have a volatile relationship but appear destined to stay together. Christopher often ignores Adriana's advice and winds up regretting it. Rosalie is the widow of previous DiMeo boss Jackie Aprile Sr. and a very close friend of Carmela. Angie is Salvatore Bonpensiero's wife. She later goes into "business" for herself, quite successfully.

Artie and Charmaine are childhood friends of the Sopranos, and owners of the popular restaurant Vesuvio. Charmaine wishes to have no association with Tony and his crew due to fears that Tony's criminal ways will ultimately ruin everything she and Artie have achieved. Artie, however—a law-abiding, hard-working man—is drawn to his childhood friend Tony's glamorous, seemingly carefree lifestyle. Charmaine bitterly resents Artie's chronic tendency to disregard her wishes while catering to Tony's; their marriage suffers greatly as a result. Charmaine also had a brief sexual encounter with Tony (when he and Carmela had temporarily broken-up) when all four were teenagers.

John "Johnny Sack" Sacramoni ( Vince Curatola ), Phil Leotardo ( Frank Vincent ) and "Little" Carmine Lupertazzi Jr. ( Ray Abruzzo ) are all significant figures in the New York City–based Lupertazzi crime family , which does a lot of business with the Soprano organization. Although the Lupertazzis' and DiMeos' interests are often at odds, Tony maintains a cordial, business-like relationship with Johnny Sack, preferring to make mutually beneficial deals, not war. Johnny Sack's second-in-command and eventual successor, Phil Leotardo, is less friendly and harder for Tony to do business with. Little Carmine is the son of the family's first boss and vies for power with its other members.

When Tony Soprano collapses after suffering a panic attack , he begins therapy with Dr. Jennifer Melfi . Details of Tony's upbringing—with his father's influence looming large on his development as a gangster, but more so that of Tony's mother, Livia , who is vengeful, narcissistic, and possibly psychopathic —are revealed. His complicated relationship with his wife Carmela is also explored, as well as her feelings regarding her husband's cosa nostra ties. Meadow and Anthony Jr. , Tony's children, gain increasing knowledge of their father's mob dealings. Later, federal indictments are brought as a result of someone in his organization talking to the FBI .

Tony's uncle Corrado "Junior" Soprano , who controls his own crew, orders the murder of Brendan Filone and the mock execution of Christopher Moltisanti , associates of Tony's, as a reprisal for repeated hijackings of trucks under Corrado's protection. Tony defuses the situation by allowing his uncle to be installed as boss of the family (following the death of the previous boss Jackie Aprile from cancer), while Tony retains actual control of most dealings from behind the scenes. Corrado discovers the subterfuge, after talking to Livia and falling for her subtle manipulation, and he orders an attempt on Tony's life. The assassination is botched and Tony responds violently, before confronting his mother for her role in plotting his downfall; she appears to have a psychologically triggered stroke as a result. Junior is arrested by the FBI on charges related to the federal indictments before Tony gets a chance to murder him in retaliation.

Jackie's brother Richie Aprile is released from prison. He proves to be uncontrollable in the business arena, siding more with Junior than Tony, despite the fact that Tony is the acting boss of the family after Junior's arrest. Richie starts a relationship with Janice , Tony's sister, who has arrived from Seattle to take care of their mother. "Big Pussy" returns to New Jersey after a conspicuous absence.

Christopher Moltisanti becomes engaged to his girlfriend Adriana La Cerva , despite his past abuse. Matthew Bevilaqua and Sean Gismonte , two low-level associates dissatisfied with their perceived lack of success in the Soprano crew, try to make names for themselves by attempting to kill Christopher as a favor to Richie, even though he didn't ask them to. Their plan fails and Christopher kills Sean, but Christopher is critically wounded. He manages to recover after surgery. Tony and Big Pussy locate Matthew and kill him. A witness to the murder goes to the FBI and identifies Tony, but later retracts his statement.

Junior is placed under house arrest as he awaits trial. Richie, frustrated with Tony's authority over him, entreats Junior to have Tony killed. Junior feigns interest, then informs Tony of Richie's intentions, leaving Tony with another problem to address. However, the situation is defused unexpectedly when Janice kills Richie in a violent argument; Tony and his men conceal all evidence of the murder, and Janice returns to Seattle.

After a food poisoning incident that causes vivid dreams, Tony finally comes to terms with his suspicion that Big Pussy might be an FBI informant. He manages to search Pussy's bedroom under false pretenses and discovers damning evidence. Tony kills Pussy on board a boat (with assistance from Silvio Dante and Paulie Gualtieri ), disposing of his body at sea.

Following the "disappearance" of Richie Aprile , the return of the ambitious Ralph Cifaretto , having spent an extended period of leisure time in Miami , marks the third season . He renews a relationship with Rosalie Aprile , the widow of Jackie Aprile Sr. With Richie assumed to have joined the Witness Protection Program, Ralph unofficially usurps control over the Aprile crew, proving to be an exceptionally dexterous earner. While Ralph's competitive merit would seemingly have him next in line to ascend to capo, his insubordination inclines Tony not to promote him and he instead gives the promotion to the less qualified but competent Gigi Cestone , causing much resentment and tension between him and Ralph.

Ralph ultimately crosses the line when, in a cocaine-induced rage, he gets into a confrontation with his pregnant girlfriend Tracee and beats her to death. This infuriates Tony, who had come to care for the girl, to the point where he violates the traditional mafia code by beating Ralph in front of the entire family. Bad blood temporarily surfaces between the two but is shortly resolved after Ralph apologizes. Cestone suffers a fatal heart attack , thereby forcing Tony to reluctantly promote Ralph to capo.

After getting arrested at the airport for stolen airplane tickets that Tony gave her, Livia is set to testify against him in court. Before that can happen, Livia dies of a stroke and Tony has to deal with his complicated feelings surrounding their relationship. Junior is diagnosed with stomach cancer ; following surgery and chemotherapy, it goes into remission.

One night after work, Dr. Melfi is raped by a stranger in a parking complex. After police mishandle evidence, the suspect is released from custody without facing charges. Dr. Melfi struggles with the fallout of the assault and the notion that she could ask Tony to deal out his brand of justice, which she ultimately decides against. Meanwhile, Tony begins an affair with Gloria Trillo , who is also a patient of Dr. Melfi. Their relationship is brief and tumultuous.

Rosalie's son Jackie Aprile Jr. becomes involved with Meadow and then descends into a downward spiral of recklessness, drugs, and crime. Tony initially attempts to act as a mentor to Jackie and encourages him to stay in school, but he becomes increasingly impatient with Jackie's escalating misbehavior, particularly as Jackie's relationship with Meadow begins to become serious. Inspired by a story from Ralph about how Tony, Jackie Sr., and Silvio Dante got made, Jackie and his friends Dino Zerilli and Carlo Renzi make a similar move and attempt to rob Eugene Pontecorvo 's Saturday night card game so they can gain recognition from the family.

The plan takes a turn for the worse when Jackie panics and kills the card dealer, provoking a shoot-out. Dino and Carlo are killed, but Jackie manages to escape. Tony decides to let Ralph handle the decision regarding Jackie Jr.'s punishment, but he strongly implies that he thinks Ralph should kill Jackie. Despite his role as a surrogate father, Ralph decides to have Jackie Jr. killed when other members of the crew play up how badly Jackie had disrespected him.

A.J. continues to get in trouble at school—despite success on the football team—which culminates in his expulsion and his parents considering sending him to military school. When he suffers a panic attack, his second after the one his old school failed to report, Tony realizes A.J. can't attend military school and he blames himself. Meadow is hit hard by Jackie Jr.'s death, resorting to drinking and then storming out of his funeral reception.

New York underboss Johnny Sack becomes enraged after learning Ralph Cifaretto joked about his wife's weight. He seeks permission from boss Carmine Lupertazzi to have Ralph killed, but is denied. Johnny orders the hit anyway. Tony receives the okay from Carmine to hit Johnny for insubordination. Junior Soprano tips Tony to use an old outfit in Providence for the work. After catching his wife eating sweets secretly instead of following her diet, Johnny Sack talks it out with her and then calls off the hit on Ralph, averting bloodshed.

Tony and Ralph invest in a racehorse named Pie-O-My , who wins several races and makes them both a great deal of money until the horse dies in a stable fire. When Ralph's 12-year-old son Justin is severely injured in an archery accident, Tony comes to believe Ralph started the stable fire himself in order to collect $200,000 in insurance money. Tony confronts Ralph and Ralph denies setting the fire. The two engage in a violent brawl, culminating in Tony strangling Ralph to death. Tony and Christopher dispose of the body and tell the rest of the crew that the likely culprit for Ralph's disappearance is Johnny Sack.

While he is leaving court, Junior is hit in the head with a boom mic and falls down several steps. Tony advises him to take advantage of the opportunity, act mentally incompetent and employ it as a ruse for not continuing the trial. When that fails, Eugene Pontecorvo intimidates a juror, resulting in a deadlocked jury, forcing the judge to declare a mistrial.

Following the death of Bobby Baccalieri 's wife, Janice pursues a romantic relationship with him. Bobby is initially reluctant to move on, but after an incident with his kids and Anthony Jr. trying to summon his deceased wife's ghost, he becomes more receptive to Janice's advances.

Christopher's addiction to heroin deepens, prompting his associates and family to organize an intervention, after which he enters a drug rehabilitation center. Adriana's friend Danielle Ciccolella is revealed to be an undercover FBI agent named Deborah Ciccerone-Waldrup , who tells Adriana the only way for her to stay out of prison for cocaine distribution at her bar is to become an informant. Adriana reluctantly agrees and starts sharing information with the FBI.

Carmela, whose relationship with Tony is tense due to financial worries and Tony's infidelities, develops a mutual infatuation with Furio Giunta . Furio, incapable of breaking his personal moral code and that of the Neapolitan mafia, clandestinely returns home to Italy. After Tony's former mistress calls their home, Carmela throws Tony out. As a result, their plan to buy a beach house falls through and Tony pesters the owner until he gets his deposit back.

Anthony Jr. starts attending a new high school, with Tony suggesting he needed to pull some strings to get him in. A.J. gets a girlfriend but is intimidated by her family's wealth. Meadow initially struggles with her ex-boyfriend's death. As she considers taking a gap year or switching schools, she sees a therapist that Dr. Melfi recommended. Eventually, Meadow finds a worthwhile cause by volunteering at a law center. She gets an apartment with some roommates and starts dating again. Her relationship with Carmela becomes strained after several arguments. Both the kids take their parents' separation hard, with A.J. asking to live with his dad instead of his mom.

Tony decides to quit therapy, thinking he isn't making any progress. He thanks Dr. Melfi for all her help and they part amicably. Stuck in a deadlock over a deal with the Lupertazzi family, Tony is approached by Johnny Sack with a proposal to murder Carmine. He considers it, even after managing to reach an agreement with Carmine, but he later becomes suspicious of Johnny's intentions and turns him down.

A string of new characters are introduced, including Tony's cousin Tony Blundetto , who simultaneously along with other Mafiosi, is released from prison. Among the others released are former DiMeo crime family capo Michele "Feech" La Manna , Lupertazzi family capo Phil Leotardo , and semi-retired Lupertazzi consigliere Angelo Garepe . Tony offers Tony B a job, but he respectfully declines, as he is determined to lead a straight life. He initially begins to take courses to earn a degree in massage therapy and aspires to open up a massage parlor. After Carmine Lupertazzi dies of a stroke, his death leaves a vacancy for the boss of the Lupertazzi family, which will soon be fought over by underboss Johnny Sack and Carmine's son Carmine Lupertazzi Jr . After Feech proves to be an insubordinate presence, Tony arranges for him to be sent back to prison by setting him up with stolen property, violating his parole.

The war between Johnny Sack and Carmine Jr. begins when Johnny has Phil kill "Lady Shylock" Lorraine Calluzzo . Tony B's attempt to stay straight comes to a head when he gets into a brawl with his employer. Angelo, who was a good friend to Tony B in prison, and Lupertazzi capo Rusty Millio offer Tony B the job of taking out Joey Peeps in retaliation for Lorraine's death. Tony B initially declines but, desperate to earn, accepts the job. He catches Joey outside a bordello, shoots him, and quickly flees the scene. Johnny believes Tony B is involved and retaliates by having Phil and his brother Billy Leotardo kill Angelo. Tony B finds the Leotardo brothers and opens fire, killing Billy and wounding Phil.

Separated from Carmela, Tony is living at his parents' house. Carmela, the sole authority figure in the home, becomes frustrated as her rules lead A.J. to resent her so she allows him to live with his father. She has a brief relationship with Robert Wegler, A.J.'s guidance counselor; he breaks it off abruptly when he suspects that she is manipulating him to improve A.J.'s grades. Tony and Carmela reconcile; Tony promises to be more loyal and agrees to pay for a piece of real estate Carmela wishes to develop.

Tony gets Meadow's boyfriend Finn De Trolio a summer job at a construction site, which is run by Aprile crew capo Vito Spatafore . Finn comes in early one morning and catches Vito performing fellatio on a security guard. Vito tries to buddy up to Finn so that he keeps quiet, but Finn soon quits the job out of fear.

After covering up a murder that occurred at The Crazy Horse, Adriana is arrested and pressured by the FBI to start sharing more relevant information about the family to avoid being charged as an accomplice. Rather than taking the risk of wearing a wire, Adriana confesses to Christopher and tries to persuade him to co-operate and become an informant against Tony. A grief-stricken Christopher instead informs Tony, who has Silvio pick up Adriana under the pretense of taking her to the hospital to see Christopher after he supposedly attempted suicide, but Silvio instead drives her out to the woods and executes her. Adriana's betrayal and subsequent execution are too much for Christopher to handle and he briefly relapses into drug use to deal with the pain.

Phil Leotardo and his henchmen beat Benny Fazio while trying to acquire the whereabouts of Tony B; Phil also threatens to have Christopher taken out if Tony B's whereabouts are not disclosed soon. To pacify New York and give his cousin a painless death, Tony tracks Tony B to their Uncle Pat's farm and executes him. Phil is furious that he did not get the opportunity to do it himself. Tony and Johnny meet at Johnny's house in a reconciliatory manner, but Johnny is arrested by Federal agents, while Tony escapes.

A senile and confused Uncle Junior shoots Tony one night in his house. Rendered comatose, Tony dreams he is a salesman on a business trip who mistakenly exchanges his briefcase and identification with a man named Kevin Finnerty. Tony's recovery from the shooting changes his outlook and he tries to mend his ways. However, he is faced with more problems in his business and personal life. Eugene Pontecorvo makes a request to Tony to get out of the life, which is subsequently denied, and coupled with the stress and problems with his home life, hangs himself in his garage.

Once Tony is out of the hospital, Johnny Sack 's daughter is about to get married and the Soprano family attends the wedding. Johnny is approved to leave prison for six hours to attend, but he is humiliated by having to pay for the metal detectors and the presence of U.S. marshals at the event. As his daughter is about to drive away with her husband, Johnny's time expires and the marshals publicly take him back to prison. In a moment of weakness and despair, Johnny bursts into tears as he is handcuffed, dismantling the remaining respect his and Tony's crews had for him.

Vito Spatafore is outed as gay after running into a friend making collections at a New York gay nightclub . The rumor spreads quickly, and once word gets to Meadow that everyone else knows, she tells Tony and Carmela about the incident between Finn and Vito. Finn is forced to tell Tony's entire crew what happened with Vito and the security guard at the construction site, solidifying their suspicions about Vito's sexuality. Tony is urged to deal with the problem by the intensely homophobic Phil Leotardo , now the acting boss of New York, whose cousin is married to Vito.

Once Vito is confronted by other members of the crew, he flees to a New Hampshire town, where he poses as an author and starts a romantic relationship with a male cook at a local diner. Despite finally living an authentic life, Vito misses the benefits his old job afforded him, so he eventually returns to New Jersey. He asks Tony to allow him to return to work, making a case that he could bring in a lot of money in Atlantic City. Vito visits his wife and children and continues to maintain that he is not a homosexual.

Tony mulls over the decision to let him back into the crew, as well as whether to let him live. When Tony fails to act, Phil intervenes and brutally executes Vito. When one of the members of the New York family, Fat Dom Gamiello , pays a visit to the Jersey office and won't stop making jokes about Vito and his death, Silvio Dante and Carlo Gervasi kill Fat Dom out of anger at his disrespect. Once more, it appears that the families are on the verge of an all-out war.

During the first half of the season, Christopher and Little Carmine head to Los Angeles in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to try to sign Ben Kingsley for a slasher film they are trying to make called Cleaver , which is a mix of The Godfather and Saw . While in Los Angeles, Chris goes back to drinking and using cocaine for a short period, and he robs famous actress Lauren Bacall . Christopher has an affair with realtor Julianna Skiff , a woman Tony was romantically interested in, which strains his relationship with Tony. When Christopher's new girlfriend Kelli Lombardo accidentally gets pregnant, they decide to get married in Atlantic City.

Christopher's film Cleaver is released, and Carmela is upset that the boss character, who is based on Tony, sleeps with his underling's girlfriend, who seems to be based on Christopher's ex Adrianna. Tony's negative portrayal in the movie further strains his relationship with Christopher. Tony considers killing several of his associates for relatively minor infractions, including Paulie Gualtieri . Christopher is unable to thrive in the business because of his addiction, deflecting his problems by relapsing and killing his friend from Narcotics Anonymous and co-writer of Cleaver , J. T. Dolan . He is then seriously injured in a car accident while driving under the influence of narcotics. Tony, the sole passenger, finally loses patience with Christopher's failings and suffocates him. He later tries to justify his actions by bringing up the infant car seat that was impaled by a branch in the accident, implying that Christopher was a danger to his new daughter.

A.J. is dumped by his fiancée and he slips into depression, culminating in a suicide attempt in the backyard pool. After spending some time in a mental institution, he returns home but is still haunted by existential questions and he ultimately decides to join the army. Tony and Carmela come up with a movie set job to keep him from enlisting, with Tony promising he would one day finance A.J.'s nightclub. Dr. Melfi is convinced by colleagues that Tony is making no progress and may even be using talk therapy to excuse his own actions and as practice for manipulative behavior. She drops him as a patient, and he fully quits therapy.

Johnny dies from lung cancer while imprisoned, and Phil officially takes over the Lupertazzi family after having his rivals killed. Phil renews his past feud with Tony and refuses to compromise with New Jersey on a garbage deal. When Tony assaults a Lupertazzi soldier for harassing Meadow while she was on a date, Phil initiates open war on the Soprano crew. He orders the executions of Bobby Baccalieri, who is shot to death; Silvio Dante, who ends up comatose; and Tony, who goes into hiding. Since Phil won't back down until Tony is executed, a deal is eventually brokered whereby the rest of the Lupertazzi family agrees to ignore the hit on Tony, allowing him to go after Phil without fear of repercussions. FBI agent Dwight Harris informs Tony of Phil's location, allowing Tony to have him killed.

Tony starts suspecting that Carlo Gervasi , a capo from New Jersey, has become an informant in an attempt to help out his son, who has recently been arrested for dealing ecstasy. Tony meets his lawyer, who informs him that subpoenas are being delivered to New Jersey and New York crews alike. Tony visits Uncle Junior for the first time since the shooting, and although he does not forgive him, he comes to understand the full extent of his dementia and that his uncle likely did not intend to kill him.

Tony plans to have a quiet dinner at a diner with his family. As Meadow arrives at the door, the camera cuts to Tony. A bell signals the door opening, Tony looks up, and the show smash cuts to black; after a few seconds, the credits roll in silence.

The Sopranos was a major ratings success throughout its run, despite being aired on premium cable network HBO , which had been available in significantly fewer American homes than regular networks. The show frequently attracted equal or larger audiences than most popular network shows of the time. The Nielsen ratings for the first four seasons are not entirely accurate, as Nielsen reported aggregate numbers for cable networks prior to January 2004, meaning that people who were included in the ratings estimates were actually watching HBO channels other than the main one on which The Sopranos aired.

The Sopranos has been hailed by many critics as the greatest and most groundbreaking television series of all time. The writing, acting, and directing have often been singled out for praise. The show has also received considerable attention from critics and journalists for its technical merit, music selections, cinematography, and willingness to deal with difficult and controversial subjects including crime, family, gender roles, mental illness, and American and Italian-American culture .

The Sopranos is credited for creating a new era in the mafia genre deviating from the traditional dramatized image of the gangster in favor of a simpler, more accurate reflection of ordinary day-to-day mob life in a suburb. The series sheds light on Italian family dynamics through the depiction of Tony's tumultuous relationship with his mother. Edie Falco's character Carmela Soprano is praised in Kristyn Gorton's essay "Why I Love Carmela Soprano" for challenging Italian-American gender roles. New Yorker editor David Remnick described The Sopranos as mirroring the "mindless commerce and consumption" of modern America. The series has an overall rating of 92 percent on Rotten Tomatoes, and 94 out of 100 on Metacritic.

The Sopranos has been called "perhaps the greatest pop-culture masterpiece of its day" by Vanity Fair contributor Peter Biskind . Remnick called the show "the richest achievement in the history of television." In 2002, TV Guide ranked The Sopranos fifth on their list of the "Top 50 TV Shows of All Time", while the series was only in its fourth season. In 2007, Channel 4 (UK) named The Sopranos the greatest television series of all time.

The first season of the series received overwhelmingly positive reviews. Following its initial airing in 1999, The New York Times stated, "[ The Sopranos ] just may be the greatest work of American popular culture of the last quarter century." In 2007, Roger Holland of PopMatters wrote, "the debut season of The Sopranos remains the crowning achievement of American television."

Time Out New York ' s Andrew Johnston had high praise for the series, stating: "Together, Chase and his fellow writers (including Terence Winter and Mad Men creator Matthew Weiner) produced the legendary Great American Novel, and it's 86 episodes long." Johnston asserted the preeminence of The Sopranos as opposed to The Wire and Deadwood in a debate with television critics Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz , both of whom would later include The Sopranos in their 2016 book titled TV (The Book) as the 2nd greatest American television series of all time, behind only The Simpsons and ahead of The Wire , with Seitz considering the show's ending to be the greatest ending for any television show.

In November and December 2009, many television critics named The Sopranos the best series of the decade and all time in articles summarizing the decade in television. In numbered lists over the best television programs, The Sopranos frequently ranked first or second, almost always competing with The Wire . In 2013, TV Guide ranked The Sopranos No. 2 in its list of The 60 Greatest Dramas of All Time, In the same year, the Writers Guild of America named it the best-written television series of all time and TV Guide ranked it as the greatest show of all time.

A 2015 The Hollywood Reporter survey of 2,800 actors, producers, directors, and other industry people named The Sopranos as their #6 favorite show. In 2016 and 2022, Rolling Stone ranked it first on the magazine's list of 100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time. In September 2019, The Guardian ranked the show first on its list of the 100 best TV shows of the 21st century, stating that it "hastened TV's transformation into a medium where intelligence, experimentation and depth were treasured" and describing it as "something to aspire to" for anyone currently making TV. In 2021, Empire ranked The Sopranos at number one on their list of The 100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time. In 2023, Variety ranked The Sopranos #3 on its own list of the 100 greatest TV shows of all time.

Certain episodes have frequently been singled out by critics as the show's best. These include the pilot, titled " The Sopranos ", " College " and " I Dream of Jeannie Cusamano " of the first season; " The Knight in White Satin Armor " and " Funhouse " of the second; " Employee of the Month ", " Pine Barrens " and " Amour Fou " of the third; " Whoever Did This " and " Whitecaps " of the fourth; " Irregular Around the Margins " and " Long Term Parking " of the fifth and " Members Only ", " Join the Club ", " Kennedy and Heidi ", " The Second Coming ", " The Blue Comet " and " Made in America " of the sixth season.

Chase's decision to end the last episode abruptly with just a black screen was controversial. While Chase has insisted that it was not his intention to stir controversy, the ambiguity over the ending and question of whether Tony was murdered has continued for years after the finale's original broadcast and has spawned numerous websites devoted to finding out his true intention.

The Sopranos won and was nominated for many awards throughout its original broadcast. It was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series in every year it was eligible and was the first cable TV series to receive a nomination for the award. After being nominated for and losing the award in 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2003 (losing the first time to The Practice and the last three to The West Wing ), The Sopranos won the award in 2004, and again in 2007. Its 2004 win made The Sopranos the first series on a cable network to win the award, while its 2007 win made the show the first drama series since Upstairs, Downstairs in 1977 to win the award after it had finished airing. The show earned 21 nominations for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series and won the award six times, with creator David Chase receiving three awards. The Sopranos won American Film Institute 's Drama Series of the Year Award in 2001 .

The Sopranos won at least one Emmy Award for acting in every eligible year except 2006 and 2007. James Gandolfini and Edie Falco were each nominated six times for Outstanding Lead Actor and Actress , respectively, both winning a total of three awards. Joe Pantoliano won an Emmy for Outstanding Supporting Actor in 2003, and Michael Imperioli and Drea de Matteo also won Emmys in 2004 for their supporting roles on the show. Other actors who have received Emmy nominations for the series include Lorraine Bracco (in the Lead Actress and Supporting Actress categories), Dominic Chianese , Nancy Marchand, Aida Turturro, Tim Daly , John Heard , Annabella Sciorra and Steve Buscemi , who was also nominated for directing the episode " Pine Barrens ".

In 1999 and 2000, The Sopranos earned two consecutive George Foster Peabody Awards . Only two other series have won the award in consecutive years: Northern Exposure (1991 and 1992) and The West Wing (1999 and 2000). The show also received numerous nominations at the Golden Globe Awards (winning the award for Best Drama Series in 2000) and the major guild awards ( Directors , Producers , Writers , and Actors ).

In 2001, the American Psychoanalytic Association presented the producers and writers with an award for "the artistic depiction of psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic psychotherapy" and also presented Lorraine Bracco with an award for creating "the most credible psychoanalyst ever to appear in the cinema or on television."

The Sopranos has been characterized by critics as one of the most influential artistic works of the 2000s and has been cited as helping to turn serial television into a legitimate art form on the same level as feature films, literature, and theater. Time Magazine editor James Poniewozik wrote in 2007, "This mafia saga showed just how complex and involving TV storytelling could be, inspiring an explosion of ambitious dramas on cable and off."

Maureen Ryan of PopMatters described The Sopranos as the most influential television drama ever. "No one-hour drama series has had a bigger impact on how stories are told on the small screen, or more influence on what kind of fare we've been offered by an ever-growing array of television networks."

Hal Boedeker stated in PopMatters in 2007 that the series was "widely influential for revealing that cable would accommodate complex series about dark characters. The Sopranos ushered in Six Feet Under , The Shield , Rescue Me , and Big Love ." Breaking Bad creator Vince Gilligan said in 2013 shortly after Gandolfini's death, "Without Tony Soprano, there would be no Walter White ."

Weiner said that when he became a writer for The Sopranos after having written the Mad Men pilot, "Whatever I had intended [ Mad Men ] to be ... was very different after seeing how seriously David Chase took human behavior. Real human behavior", giving " Maidenform " and how Peggy Olson 's baby affects her as examples.

The series helped establish HBO as producers of critically acclaimed and commercially successful original television series. Michael Flaherty of The Hollywood Reporter has stated that The Sopranos "helped launch [HBO's] reputation as a destination for talent looking for cutting-edge original series work."

The show has frequently been accused of perpetuating negative stereotypes about Italian Americans . Several major organizations have voiced their concern that The Sopranos presents a very distorted and harmful stereotype of Italian Americans and their cultural values, including the National Italian American Foundation, Order Sons of Italy in America , Unico National , and the Italic Institute of America.

In 2000, officials in Essex County, New Jersey , denied producers permission to film scenes in the South Mountain Reservation, which is county-owned property, by Essex County, New Jersey Executive James Treffinger , who argued that the show depicts Italian Americans "in stereotypical fashion". In 2002, organizers of the New York City Columbus Day Parade won an injunction preventing Mayor Michael Bloomberg from inviting cast members of The Sopranos to participate in the parade.

Fairleigh Dickinson University 's PublicMind conducted a national survey in August 2001 that polled 800 people, out of which 37% said that they watched the show regularly, and 65% of this group (192 people, or 24% of the total) disagreed that the show negatively portrayed Italian Americans. Professor William Roberts, who was associated with the poll, said that "The show's inflated image of organized crime casts a shadow over both the state [of New Jersey] and its Italian American community."

He further stated "The show helped to perpetuate one of the more problematic and stereotypical images of Italian Americans. Both Italian and Italian American cultures have much more diverse and interesting heritages than the American public generally realizes." Humanities professor Camille Paglia , herself an Italian American, has spoken negatively about The Sopranos , arguing that its depiction of Italian Americans was inaccurate, inauthentic, and dated.

Chase has defended his show, saying that "It is not meant to stereotype all Italian Americans, only to depict a small criminal subculture".

Actors from The Sopranos have reprised their roles, or at the very least parodied their roles, in various other media. Tony Sirico and Steve Schirripa appear in two separate Muppet-related Christmas specials, A Muppets Christmas: Letters to Santa and Elmo's Christmas Countdown , parodying their roles on The Sopranos . Sirico also appeared in a series of commercials for Denny's in-character as Paulie Gualtieri , a nod to the restaurant chain's mention in " Pine Barrens ". James Gandolfini appeared on Weekend Update as a "New Jersey Resident" on the October 2, 2004, episode of Saturday Night Live to comment on the recent resignation of New Jersey governor Jim McGreevey . Gandolfini's character went unnamed, and hosts Tina Fey and Amy Poehler insisted at the segment's conclusion that he was "unidentified", but the character was clearly meant to be Tony Soprano.

Jamie-Lynn Sigler and Robert Iler reprised their roles as Meadow and A.J. Soprano in a Chevrolet television commercial initially broadcast in 2022 during Super Bowl LVI . David Chase directed the commercial and treated it as a continuation of The Sopranos story. At Chase's insistence, former Sopranos director of photography Phil Abraham performed the filming. The ad recreates the opening-title sequence of The Sopranos , with Meadow driving a Silverado EV (as opposed to Tony's Chevrolet Suburban ) and meeting A.J. at Bahrs Landing, featured in The Many Saints of Newark . Along the way, she passes some Sopranos landmarks including Satriale's . Chase wanted the commercial to continue the intrigue surrounding The Sopranos finale : besides the visual allusion to the episode with Meadow's parking, Chase intentionally left open why Meadow and A.J. were at the restaurant and who they could be meeting there.

In an interview with The Independent journalist Annabel Nugent in February 2026, Sopranos regulars Michael Imperioli and Steve Schirripa conceded that James Gandolfini's death in 2013 ended the chance for a Sopranos reboot series.

The first four seasons of The Sopranos were released on VHS in five-volume box sets which lack bonus material.

All six Sopranos seasons were released as DVD box sets, with the sixth season released in two parts. A complete series box set was released in 2008.

The sixth season was released on Blu-ray Disc and HD DVD in 2006 and 2007. The first season was released on Blu-ray in 2009. A complete series box set was released in 2014. The entire series is set to be released on 4K Blu-ray on December 8, 2026.

Three companion books, written by Allen Rucker , were published during The Sopranos ' run:

On September 17, 2020, Michael Imperioli and Steve Schirripa signed a deal with HarperCollins book imprint William Morrow and Company to write an oral history of the show; the book, titled Woke Up This Morning: The Definitive Oral History of The Sopranos , was released on November 2, 2021.

Two official soundtrack compilations were released featuring music used in The Sopranos :

A video game based on the series, titled The Sopranos: Road to Respect , was developed by 7 Studios and released by THQ for the PlayStation 2 in November 2006. The game features the voices and likenesses of key Sopranos cast members.

In 2005, Stern Pinball released a Sopranos pinball machine designed by George Gomez.

Several cast members of The Sopranos have started podcasts regarding the series. Michael Imperioli and Steve Schirripa began hosting a podcast called Talking Sopranos on April 6, 2020, where the two provide inside info as they follow The Sopranos series episode-by-episode and interview cast and crew from the series. By September 2020, the podcast had reached over five million downloads. In May 2021, the podcast won a Webby Award for Best Television & Film Podcast by method of "People's Voice Winner".

Drea de Matteo and Chris Kushner began hosting a re-watch podcast on March 13, 2020, called Made Women ; in July, the podcast was retooled and renamed Gangster Goddess Broad-Cast .

In March 2018, New Line Cinema announced that they had purchased a film detailing The Sopranos background story, set in the 1960s and '70s during, and in the wake of, the Newark riots . The 2021 film, The Many Saints of Newark , was written by David Chase and Lawrence Konner and directed by Alan Taylor . Alessandro Nivola was cast in the film as Christopher Moltisanti 's father Dickie , and Michael Gandolfini , James Gandolfini's son, as the younger version of Tony Soprano. Vera Farmiga , Jon Bernthal , Ray Liotta , Corey Stoll , Billy Magnussen and John Magaro are other cast members.

The film was initially scheduled to be released on September 25, 2020, however, the film's release was delayed multiple times due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States ; it was released on October 1, 2021, in theaters and on HBO Max .

Chase has expressed interest in producing a sequel to The Many Saints of Newark that follows Tony Soprano in his 20s, provided he could collaborate with former Sopranos writer Terence Winter . Upon hearing this, Winter replied he would do it "in a heartbeat. Absolutely."Other reasons this message may be displayed:



There was systematic political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union , based on the interpretation of political opposition or dissent as a psychiatric problem, rather than a social, political, or material one.

The extent of this abuse depended on the time period. It started in the late 1940s and was systemic in the 1960s to the mid-1980s.

The Criminal Code was applied in conjunction with the system of diagnosis for mental illness developed by Andrei Snezhnevsky to establish a framework within which non-standard beliefs could easily be defined as criminal offences and subsequently be the basis for a psychiatric diagnosis. Diagnoses such as " sluggish schizophrenia " or "political intoxication" were applied to dissenters, who were then incarcerated in psychiatric wards with poor living conditions.

Psychiatry allowed Soviet authorities to bypass standard legal procedures and avoid the odium attached to political trials. Dissidence was also thus discredited as the result of unhealthy minds.

At least 20,000 dissenters were put in psychiatric hospitals for political crimes. Russia is still impacted by Soviet political abuse of psychiatry.

Political abuse of psychiatry is the misuse of psychiatric diagnosis, detention and treatment for the purposes of obstructing the fundamental human rights of certain groups and individuals in a society.

Punitive psychiatry is based upon "the deliberate interpretation of dissent [...] as a psychiatric problem". It entails the exculpation and committal of citizens to psychiatric facilities based upon political rather than mental health-based criteria.

Punitive psychiatry is neither a distinct subject nor a psychiatric specialty. It is the result of members of the psychiatric profession serving the state's will in matters of repression – a phenomenon that happens in the applied sciences of many totalitarian countries. [ verification needed ]

The diagnosis of mental disease can give the state license to detain persons against their will and insist upon therapy both in the interest of the detainee and in the broader interests of society. In addition, receiving a psychiatric diagnosis is itself oppressive.

Punitive medicine (punitive psychiatry) is used to repress dissidents that cannot be punished by legal means. Psychiatry can be used to bypass standard legal procedures for establishing guilt or innocence and allow political incarceration without the ordinary odium attached to such political trials.

Psychiatric power in practically all societies expands on the grounds of public safety, which, in the USSR, was best maintained by the repression of dissidence. The definition of danger was radically extended by the Soviet criminal system to cover "political" as well as customary physical types of "danger".

Sending dissenters to psychiatrists also discredited dissidence as the product of unhealthy minds.

Forensic psychiatrists were asked to examine offenders whose mental state was considered abnormal by the investigating officers. People could also be hospitalized on the request of their headman, their relatives or a district psychiatrist.

Dissidents were almost always examined at the Serbsky Central Research Institute for Forensic Psychiatry in Moscow, where they were subjected to a forensic-psychiatric expert evaluation. Patients could also be examined by prison doctors or at clinics.

The " anti-Soviet " political behavior of some individuals was defined simultaneously as criminal acts (e.g., a violation of Articles 70 or 190–1 ), symptoms of mental illness (e.g., "delusion of reformism "), and susceptible to a ready-made diagnosis (e.g., " sluggish schizophrenia " , "political intoxication" or "philosophical intoxication" ). The explanation of dissent as a psychiatric problem was called "psychopathological mechanisms" of dissent .

The accused had no right of appeal. The right was given to their relatives or other interested persons, who were not allowed to nominate psychiatrists to evaluate the patient. All psychiatrists were considered equally credible before the law and fully independent.

The political abuse of psychiatry in the USSR arose from the conception that opponents of the Soviet regime were sick since there was no other logical reason to oppose the best sociopolitical system. [ verification needed ]

The psychiatric incarceration of certain individuals was prompted by their attempts to emigrate, to distribute or possess prohibited documents or books, to participate in civil rights protests and demonstrations, to be involved in forbidden religious activities and to write critical books.

Political abuse of psychiatry in the  Soviet Union was facilitated by the fact that the national classification included categories that could be employed to label dissenters, who could then be forcibly incarcerated and medicated.

Andrei Snezhnevsky developed a novel classification of mental disorders with an original set of diagnostic criteria. Despite a number of its controversial premises, Snezhnevsky's hypothesis immediately acquired the status of dogma, in line with the traditions of then Soviet science. This dogma was later overcome in other disciplines but firmly stuck in psychiatry.

"Philosophical intoxication", for instance, was widely applied when people disagreed with nomenklatura or party leadership , or criticized sanctioned political philosophies , theory or the theoreticians who conceived them. When the dissidents were themselves communists, they were also accused of " revisionism ". [ verification needed ]

Andrei Snezhnevsky was essentially responsible for the Soviet concept of schizophrenia with a "sluggish type" manifestation by "reformerism" including other symptoms. It was the most prominently diagnosis used in cases of dissidents. It could be applied to nearly any behavior deemed abnormal or asocial. Pessimism, poor social adaptation and conflict with authorities were themselves sufficient for a formal diagnosis of "sluggish schizophrenia".

According to most scholars, psychiatrists involved in the development of sluggish schizophrenia were following directives from the Communist Party and the secret service, and were well aware of its eventual political uses. Nevertheless, for many Soviet psychiatrists, "sluggish schizophrenia" was a logical explanation for the behavior of critics who seemed willing to jeopardize their happiness, family, and career for a reformist conviction that was so divergent from the prevailing social and political orthodoxy.

The incarceration of free thinking healthy people in madhouses is spiritual murder, it is a variation of the gas chamber, even more cruel; the torture of the people being killed is more malicious and more prolonged. Like the gas chambers, these crimes will never be forgotten and those involved in them will be condemned for all time during their life and after their death." ( Alexander Solzhenitsyn )

In the Soviet Union, dissidents were often confined in psychiatric wards commonly called psikhushkas . One of the first penal psikhushkas was the Psychiatric Prison Hospital in Kazan , which in 1939 was transferred to the NKVD 's control on the orders of Beria .

Many dissidents were sent to regular psychiatric hospitals, which were unhygienic, overcrowded and often ran by drunks and sadists. Dissidents who were considered more dangerous were sent to "special psychiatric hospitals", which were run by the MVD and were alike to prisons.

There, they would be subjected to forced administration of drugs , beatings electric shocks, lumbar punctures and other forms of treatment or punishment. Many went crazy and some died during treatment. Patients had no rights and were entirely dependent on the psychiatrists' wills. They were only protected by rules put in place by legal and medical departments.

Hospitalization did not have an end date, and, as a result, there were cases when dissidents were kept in psychiatric prison hospitals for 10 or even 15 years. The duration of the treatment was chosen entirely by the psychiatrist. Dissidents would be freed once they recanted their previous convictions and admitted that mental illness had caused them to criticize the Soviet system.

As early as 1948, the Soviet secret service took an interest in psychiatry. A system of political abuse of psychiatry was developed at the end of Joseph Stalin 's regime. The use of psychiatry as a political weapon was ordered by Andrey Vyshinsky , a chief of the secret police.

Punitive psychiatry was not simply an inheritance from the Stalin era, however. The Gulag was already an effective instrument of political repression. There was no compelling reason to develop a more expensive substitute such as punitive psychiatry.

The USSR did not have legislative acts regulating psychiatry until 1988 as the patient was seen as a burden to society.

A precursor to later abuses in psychiatry in the Soviet Union, the "Joint Session" of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences and the Board of the All-Union Neurological and Psychiatric Association took place from 10 to 15 October 1951. The event was dedicated to the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov .

During the session, it was alleged that several of the USSR's leading neuroscientists and psychiatrists of the time were guilty of practicing "anti-Pavlovian, anti-Marxist, idealistic [and] reactionary" science, much to Soviet psychiatry's detriment. These eminent psychiatrists had to publicly recant their scientific positions and promise to conform to "Pavlovian" doctrines.

Several leading Soviet academic neuroscientists were labeled as anti-Pavlovians, anti-materialists and reactionaries and were subsequently dismissed from their positions. Some of these scientists were also imprisoned and tortured. The Joint Session ravaged research in neuroscience and psychiatry for years to come, which came to be dominated by pseudo-science.

Following the Pavlovian session and the Joint Session, Snezhnevky's school became predominant. It was given monopoly over psychiatry in 1950 – an important factor in the rise of political psychiatry. Motivated by Snezhnevky, Soviet doctors devised a "Pavlovian theory of schizophrenia" and increasingly applied this diagnostic category to political dissidents.

The campaign to declare political opponents mentally sick and commit dissenters to mental hospitals began in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Nikita Khrushchev asserted that it was impossible for members of a socialist society to be anti-socialist. Whenever dissidence could not be justified as a provocation of imperialism or a legacy of the past, they were labelled as the product of mental illness.

A crime is a deviation from generally recognized standards of behavior frequently caused by mental disorder. Can there be diseases, nervous disorders among certain people in a Communist society? Evidently yes. If that is so, then there will also be offences, which are characteristic of people with abnormal minds. Of those who might start calling for opposition to Communism on this basis, we can say that clearly their mental state is not normal.

— Nikita Khrushchev , Speech published in Pravda , 24 May 1959

By the end of the 1950s, confinement to psychiatric institutions had become the most common method to punish leaders of the political opposition.

The atmosphere at the Serbsky Institute in Moscow altered almost overnight when Daniil Lunts took over as head of the Fourth Department (otherwise known as the Political Department). Psychiatric departments had previously been regarded as a 'refuge' against being dispatched to the Gulag . The first reports of dissenters being hospitalized on non-medical grounds date from the early 1960s, not long after Georgy Morozov was appointed director of the Serbsky Institute.

In the 1960s and 1970s, the trials of dissenters and their referral for "treatment" to the Special Psychiatric Hospitals under MVD control and oversight became known to the world. This wave of "psychiatric terror" was flatly denied by the leaders of the Serbsky Institute . The Soviet practice of incarcerating of political dissidents in mental hospitals entailed strong condemnation from the international community and damaged the credibility of psychiatry in the Soviet Union.

In the 1960s, a vigorous movement grew protesting the abuse of psychiatry in the USSR. Political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union was denounced in the course of the Congresses of the World Psychiatric Association in Mexico City (1971), Hawaii (1977), Vienna (1983) and Athens (1989). The campaign to terminate political abuse of psychiatry in the USSR was a key episode in the Cold War , inflicting irretrievable damage on the prestige of medicine in the Soviet Union.

From the 1960s to 1986, psychiatry was systematically abused for political purposes in the Soviet Union. Dissidents came to be prosecuted under the principle of socialist legality . It became apparent that putting people who gave anti-Soviet speeches on trial was detrimental to the regime. Such individuals were instead given a psychiatric examination and declared insane.

Political abuse of psychiatry as a systematic method of repression was developed by Yuri Andropov with a group of associates, in the KGB. Andropov was responsible for a wide-range of psychiatric repression as soon as he was appointed as head the KGB on 18 May 1967. On 29 April 1969, Andropov submitted a plan to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union to set up a network of mental hospitals to repress dissenters. Andropov's proposal was adopted [ verification needed ] and implemented.

On 15 May 1969, a Soviet Government decree (No. 345–209) was issued, confirming the practice of psychiatrists confining undesirables [ clarification needed ] in detention. Soviet psychiatrists given individuals to examine, and could either have the police detain them or entrap them into coming to the hospital. Court decisions were not required to confine an individual indefinitely in a psychiatric institution.

From the mid-1970s to the 1990s, the structure of the USSR mental health service was split in two distinct systems which for the most part co-existed peacefully. The first system was that of punitive psychiatry. It directly served the authorities, and was headed by the Moscow Institute for Forensic Psychiatry . The second system was made up of elite, psychotherapeutically oriented clinics. It was headed by the Leningrad Psychoneurological Institute . Hospitals of the Soviet Union combined elements of both systems.

If dissidents were mentally ill, they were sent to psychiatric hospitals and confined there until they died. If the state of their mental health was uncertain but they were not constantly unwell, they and their kharakteristika [testimonial from employers, the Party and other Soviet institutions] were sent to a labour camp or shot. [ verification needed ]

As General Secretary , Yuri Andropov continued the Brezhnev era policy of confining dissenters in mental hospitals.

In 1988 and 1989, between one million and two million people were removed from the psychiatric registry in the Soviet Union at the request of Western psychiatrists. It was a condition for the re-admission of Soviet psychiatrists to the World Psychiatric Association .

According to the "Commentary" to the post-Soviet Russian Federation Law on Psychiatric Care , individuals forced to undergo treatment in Soviet psychiatric medical institutions [ clarification needed ] were entitled to rehabilitation and could claim compensation. The Russian Federation acknowledged that psychiatry had been used for political purposes and took responsibility for the victims of "political psychiatry."

From 1993 to 1995, a presidential decree on measures to prevent future abuse of psychiatry was being drafted at the Commission for Rehabilitation of the Victims of Political Repression. When the material for discussion was ready, work came to a standstill. The documents failed to reach the head of the Commission Alexander Yakovlev .

Since the fall of the Soviet Union , political abuse of psychiatry has continued in Russia . Human rights activists face the threat of psychiatric diagnosis for their civic and political activities.

Psychiatric labels, or stigmas , have spread so widely that the media commonly calls disliked persons schizo and apply generalized psychiatric assessments to phenomena of public life. [ verification needed ] The word psikhushka entered everyday vocabulary. Deviants to usual standards of thought and behavior are declared mentally ill. Because of this stigmatization, people with actual mental disorders avoid publicity [ clarification needed ] at all cost.

Russian patients are defensive toward medical psychologists and psychiatrists, preventing attempts to understand them and assess their condition. The psychiatrist is feared, not confided in, not told secrets and asked only to provide medication. This disposition is related to a constant, subconscious fear of psychiatrists and psychiatry caused by the abuse of psychiatry and the constant violence in the totalitarian and post-totalitarian society.

Psychiatry lost its credibility and professional basis entirely when it was abused to stifle dissidence in the  USSR. According to St Petersburg psychiatrist Vladimir Pshizov, a disastrous factor for domestic psychiatry is that those who had committed crimes against humanity were allowed to stay on their positions until their death.

Psychiatry is vulnerable because many of its notions have been questioned, and the sustainable pattern of mental life, of boundaries of mental norm and abnormality has been lost, director of the Moscow Research Institute for Psychiatry Valery Krasnov says, adding that psychiatrists have to seek new reference points to make clinical assessments and new reference points to justify old therapeutical interventions.

Modern Russian psychiatry and the structure of mental health care are aimed not at protecting the patient's right to an own place in life, but at discrediting such a right, revealing symptoms and isolating the patient.

Critics allege that practically nothing has changed at the Serbky institute, as the people who worked there in Soviet times are still working there. The Serbsky Institute is claimed to still be subservient to the State.

In 2007, Alexander Dugin , a professor at the Moscow State University and adviser to State Duma speaker Sergei Naryshkin , presented opponents of Vladimir Putin 's policy as mentally ill by saying, "There are no longer opponents of Putin's policy, and if there are, they are mentally ill and should be sent to prophylactic health examination." In 2012, psychiatrist Dilya Enikeyeva gave and publicized the diagnosis in absentia of histrionic personality disorder to Kseniya Sobchak , a Russian TV anchor and member of the political opposition, in violation of medical privacy and medical ethics . She also stated that Sobchak was harmful to society.

According to the commentary by the Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia on the 2007 text by Vladimir Rotstein, a doctrinist of Snezhnevsky's school, there are patients with delusion of reformism in psychiatric inpatient facilities for involuntary treatment. In 2012, delusion of reformism was a symptom of mental disorder according to Psychiatry. National Manual . In the same year, Vladimir Pashkovsky reported that he diagnosed 4.7 percent of 300 patients with delusion of reform. Patients are also said to be suffering from "syndrome of litigiousness" if in addition they wrote complaints to Moscow, which should only be written by a reviewing authority or lawyer.

An official at the Serbsky Institute declared "patient" Vladimir Bukovsky , who was then going to run for the President of the Russian Federation, undoubtedly "psychopathic".

In 1994, a conference concerning the political abuse of psychiatry was attended by representatives from several former Soviet Republics including Russia, Belarus , the Baltics , the Caucasus , and some of the Central Asian Republics . Dainius Puras made a report on the situation within the Lithuanian Psychiatric Association , where discussion had been held but no resolution had been passed. Yuri Nuller talked over how in Russia the wind direction was gradually changing and the systematic political abuse of psychiatry was again being denied and degraded as an issue of "hyperdiagnosis" or "scientific disagreement."

The political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union has been minimized by psychiatrist Fedor Kondratev and Tatyana Dmitrieva, and denied by Alan A. Stone , Mikhail Vinogradov, Aleksandr Tiganov , Anatoly Smulevich and many leaders of Russian psychiatry . According to Valery Krasnov and Isaak Gurovich, official representatives of psychiatry involved in its political abuse never acknowledged the groundlessness of their diagnostics and actions.

The Commission has also considered such a complex, socially relevant issue, as the use of psychiatry for political purposes. The collected documents and materials allow us to say that the extrajudicial procedure of admission to psychiatric hospitals was used for compulsory hospitalization of persons whose behavior was viewed by the authorities as "suspicious" from the political point of view. According to the incomplete data, hundreds of thousands of people have been illegally placed to psychiatric institutions of the country over the years of Soviet power. The rehabilitation of these people was limited, at best, to their removal from the registry of psychiatric patients and usually remains so today, due to gaps in the legislation.

— Commission for Rehabilitation of the Victims of Political Repression, 2000

The scale of psychiatric abuses in the past, the use of psychiatric doctrines by the totalitarian state have been thoroughly concealed. [ verification needed ] Relevant archives remain closed to researchers.

Classified government documents that became available after the dissolution of the Soviet Union confirm that the authorities consciously used psychiatry as a tool to suppress dissent.

According to data of the International Association on the Political Use of Psychiatry 's archives, thousands of dissenters were hospitalized for political reasons. From 1994 to 1995, an investigative commission of Moscow psychiatrists explored the records of five prison psychiatric hospitals in Russia and discovered about two thousand cases of political abuse of psychiatry in these hospitals alone.

According to Anatoly Prokopenko 's calculations based on what he found in top secret documents in 2004, about 15,000 people were confined for political crimes in the psychiatric prison hospitals under the control of the MVD. In 2005, using the Archives of the CPSU Central Committee and the records of the three Special Psychiatrial Hospitals (Sychyovskaya, Leningrad and Chernyakhovsk hospitals), Prokopenko concluded that psychiatry had been used as punitive measure against at least 20,000 people for purely political reasons.

The percentage of "the mentally ill" among those accused of so-called anti-Soviet activities proved many times higher than among criminal offenders. The attention paid to political prisoners by Soviet psychiatrists was more than 40 times greater than their attention to ordinary criminal offenders.

The report on political abuse of psychiatry prepared at the request of the commission by Gushansky with the aid of Prokopenko lay unclaimed and even the Independent Psychiatric Journal ( Nezavisimiy Psikhiatricheskiy Zhurnal ) would not publish it. The Moscow Research Center for Human Rights and the Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia were asked by Gushansky to publish the materials and archival documents on punitive psychiatry but showed no interest in doing so. The publishing such documents is dictated by present-day needs and by how far it is feared that psychiatry could again be abused for non-medical purposes. [ clarification needed ]

The evidence for the misuse of psychiatry for political purposes in the Soviet Union was documented in a number of articles and books. Several national psychiatric associations examined and acted upon this documentation.

The widely known sources including published and written memoirs by victims of psychiatric arbitrariness convey moral and physical sufferings experienced by the victims in special psychiatric hospitals of the USSR.

Various documents and reports were published in the Information Bulletin of the Working Commission on the Abuse of Psychiatry For Political Purposes, and circulated in the samizdat periodical Chronicle of Current Events . Other sources were documents by the Moscow Helsinki Group and in books by Alexander Podrabinek ( Punitive Medicine , 1979) Anatoly Prokopenko ( Mad Psychiatry , 1997, "Безумная психитрия") and Vladimir Bukovsky ( Judgment in Moscow , 1994). To these may be added Soviet psychiatry – fallacies and fantasy by Ada Korotenko and Natalia Alikina ("Советская психиатрия. Заблуждения и умысел") and Executed by Madness , 1971 ("Казнимые сумасшествием").

In 1972, 1975, 1976, 1984, and 1988 the United States Government Printing Office published documents on political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union .

From 1987 to 1991, the International Association on the Political Use of Psychiatry (IAPUP) published forty-two volumes of Documents on the Political Abuse of Psychiatry in the USSR . Today these are preserved by the Columbia University Libraries in the archival collection entitled Human Rights Watch Records: Helsinki Watch, 1952–2003, Series VII: Chris Panico Files, 1979–1992, USSR, Psychiatry, International Association on the Political Use of Psychiatry , Box 16, Folder 5–8 (English version) and Box 16, Folder 9–11 (Russian version).

In 1992, the British Medical Association published certain some documents on the subject in Medicine Betrayed: The Participation of Doctors in Human Rights Abuses .

In 1978, the book I Vozvrashchaetsa Veter... ( And the Wind Returns... ) by Vladimir Bukovsky, describing the dissident movement, their struggle or freedom, practices of dealing with dissenters, and dozen years spent by Bukovsky in Soviet labor camps, prisons and psychiatric hospitals, was published and later translated into English under the title To Build a Castle: My Life as a Dissenter .

In 1979, Leonid Plyushch published his book Na Karnavale Istorii ( At History's Сarnival ) in which he described how he and other dissidents were committed to psychiatric hospitals. The same year, the book was translated into English under the title History's Carnival: A Dissident's Autobiography .

In 1980, the book by Yuri Belov Razmyshlenia ne tolko o Sychovke: Roslavl 1978 ( Reflections not only on Sychovka: Roslavl 1978 ) was published.

In 1981, Pyotr Grigorenko published his memoirs V Podpolye Mozhno Vstretit Tolko Krys ( In Underground One Can Meet Only Rats ), which included the story of his psychiatric examinations and hospitalizations. In 1982, the book was translated into English under the title Memoirs .

In 1982, Soviet philosopher Pyotr Abovin-Yegides published his article "Paralogizmy politseyskoy psikhiatrii i ikh sootnoshenie s meditsinskoy etikoy (Paralogisms of police psychiatry and their relation to medical ethics)."

In 1983, Evgeny Nikolaev 's book Predavshie Gippokrata ( Betrayers of Hippocrates ), when translated from Russian into German under the title Gehirnwäsche in Moskau ( Brainwashing in Moscow ), first came out in München and told about psychiatric detention of its author for political reasons. In 1984, the book under its original title was first published in Russian which the book had originally been written in.

In 1983, Yuri Vetokhin published his memoirs Sklonen k Pobegu translated into English under the title Inclined to Escape in 1986.

In 1987, Robert van Voren published his book Koryagin: A man Struggling for Human Dignity telling about psychiatrist Anatoly Koryagin who resisted political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union.

In 1988, Reportazh iz Niotkuda ( Reportage from Nowhere ) by Viktor Rafalsky was published. In the publication, he described his confinement in Soviet psychiatric hospitals.

In 1993, Valeriya Novodvorskaya published her collection of writings Po Tu Storonu Otchayaniya ( Beyond Despair ) in which her experience in the prison psychiatric hospital in Kazan was described.

In 1996, Vladimir Bukovsky published his book Moskovsky Protsess ( Moscow trial )
containing an account of developing the punitive psychiatry based on
documents that were being submitted to and considered by the Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union . The book was translated into English in 1998 under the title Reckoning With Moscow: A Nuremberg Trial for Soviet Agents and Western Fellow Travelers .

In 2001, Nikolay Kupriyanov published his book GULAG-2-SN which has a foreword by Anatoly Sobchak , covers repressive psychiatry in Soviet Army , and tells about humiliations Kupriyanov underwent in the psychiatric departments of the Northern Fleet hospital and the Kirov Military Medical Academy .

In 2002, St. Petersburg forensic psychiatrist Vladimir Pshizov published his book Sindrom Zamknutogo Prostranstva ( Syndrome of Closed Space ) describing the hospitalization of Viktor Fainberg.

In 2003, the book Moyа Sudba i Moyа Borba protiv Psikhiatrov ( My Destiny and My Struggle against Psychiatrists ) was published by Anatoly Serov, who worked as a lead design engineer before he was committed to a psychiatric hospital.

In 2010, Alexander Shatravka published his book Pobeg iz Raya ( Escape from Paradise ) in which he described how he and his companions were caught after they illegally crossed the border between Finland and the Soviet Union to escape from the latter country and, as a result, were confined to Soviet psychiatric hospitals and prisons. In his book, he also described methods of brutal treatment of prisoners in the institutions.

In 2012, Soviet dissident and believer Vladimir Khailo's wife published her book Subjected to Intense Persecution .

2014 saw the book Zha Zholtoy Stenoy ( Behind the Yellow Wall ) by Alexander Avgust , a former inmate of Soviet psychiatric hospitals who in his book describes the wider circle of their inhabitants than literature on the issue usually does.

In 1965, Valery Tarsis published in the West his book Ward 7: An Autobiographical Novel based upon his own experiences in 1963–1964 when he was detained in the Moscow Kashchenko psychiatric hospital for political reasons. The book was the first literary work to deal with the Soviet authorities' abuse of psychiatry.

In 1968, the Russian poet Joseph Brodsky wrote Gorbunov and Gorchakov , a forty-page long poem in thirteen cantos consisting of lengthy conversations between two patients in a Soviet psychiatric prison as well as between each of them separately and the interrogating psychiatrists. The topics vary from the taste of the cabbage served for supper to the meaning of life and Russia's destiny. The poem was translated into English by Harry Thomas. The experience underlying Gorbunov and Gorchakov was formed by two stints of Brodsky at psychiatric establishments.

In 1977, British playwright Tom Stoppard wrote the play Every Good Boy Deserves Favour that criticized the Soviet practice of treating political dissidence as a form of mental illness. The play is dedicated to Viktor Fainberg and Vladimir Bukovsky , two Soviet dissidents expelled to the West.

In the 1983 novel Firefox Down by Craig Thomas , captured American pilot Mitchell Gant is imprisoned in a KGB psychiatric clinic "associated with the Serbsky Institute", where he is drugged and interrogated to force him to reveal the location of the Firefox aircraft, which he has stolen and flown out of Russia.

Archival sources

Government publications and official reports

Books

Journal articles and book chapters

Newspapers

Websites

The Chevrolet Volt is a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle car that was manufactured across two generations by General Motors , and also marketed in rebadged variants as the Holden Volt in Australia and New Zealand and the Buick Velite 5 in China, and with a different fascia as the Vauxhall Ampera in the United Kingdom and as the Opel Ampera in the remainder of Europe. Volt production ended in February 2019. While similar in some ways to hybrid vehicles, the Chevy Volt is an electric car with an onboard gasoline generator.

Sales of the first-generation Volt began in the United States in mid-December 2010, followed by some European countries and other international markets in 2011. Global combined Volt/Ampera-family sales totaled about 177,000 units by the end of October 2018. The U.S. was the leading market, with 157,054 Volts delivered through the end of 2019, followed by Canada with 16,653 Volts sold through September 2018. Just over 10,000 Opel/Vauxhall Ampera cars had been sold in Europe as of June 2016 [ update ] . Until December 2018, the Volt/Ampera family of vehicles was the world's bestselling plug-in hybrid vehicle. When it was discontinued, the Chevrolet Volt was still listed as the top-selling plug-in hybrid in the American market.

The Volt operates as a pure battery electric vehicle until its battery capacity drops to a predetermined threshold from full charge. From there, its internal combustion engine powers an electric generator to extend the vehicle's range as needed. While running on gasoline at high speeds the engine may be mechanically linked (by a clutch) to the car's gearbox, improving efficiency by 10% to 15%. The Volt's regenerative braking also contributes to the on-board electricity generation. Under the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) cycle, the 2013 ‍ – ‍ 15 model year Volt all-electric range is 38 mi (61 km) , with a combined electric mode/gasoline-only rating of 62 mpg ‑ US (3.8 L/100 km; 74 mpg ‑ imp ) equivalent (MPG equivalent).

The second-generation Volt 's improved battery system and drivetrain increased the all-electric range to 53 miles (85 km) , its EPA-rated fuel economy in charge-sustaining mode to 42 mpg ‑ US (5.6 L/100 km; 50 mpg ‑ imp ) , and the combined city/highway fuel economy in all-electric mode to 106 MPG-e, up from 98 MPG-e. Deliveries to retail customers in the U.S. and Canada began in October 2015 as a 2016 model year .

The Volt won several awards, including the 2009 Green Car Vision Award , 2011 Green Car of the Year , 2011 North American Car of the Year , 2011 World Green Car , 2011 SAE Best engineered car, 2012 European Car of the Year , and 2016 Green Car of the Year.

The production design model officially unveiled on September 16, 2008, as part of General Motors (GM) centennial celebration at the Wintergarden headquarters in Detroit. The production model differed greatly in design from the original concept car. The carmaker cited necessary aerodynamic changes needed to reduce the concept car's high drag coefficient of C d =0.43 down to C d =0.28 , still higher than the Toyota Prius C d =0.25 . Another reason was the use of General Motors's new global compact vehicle platform Delta II to keep costs reasonable, and shared with the 2010 model year Chevrolet Cruze . Another significant difference from the concept car was the seating, as the production Volt seats four rather than five passengers. This change was due to the higher-than-usual central tunnel that runs from the front console to the rear seat that houses the car's T-shaped battery pack.

After the concept was put into the pipeline for production, GM began looking for a partner to develop the Volt's lithium-ion battery pack. The carmaker evaluated about 25 battery cell chemistries and constructions from around two dozen lithium-ion battery makers around the world. Due to their more promising cell technologies, two companies were selected in June 2007, Compact Power (CPI), which uses a lithium manganese oxide (LiMn 2 O 4 ) cell made by its parent company, LG Chemical ; and Continental Automotive Systems , which uses lithium iron phosphate based cylindrical cells made by A123Systems . By the end of October 2007 CPI (LG Chem) delivered their finished battery pack prototypes , and A123 delivered theirs by January 2008. GM's testing process was conducted at the laboratory the carmaker had created for the GM EV1 program. The battery packs included monitoring systems designed to keep the batteries cool and operating at optimum capacity despite a wide range of ambient temperatures. To ensure the battery pack would last 10 years and 150,000 miles (240,000 km) expected for the battery warranty, the Volt team decided to use only half of the 16 kWh capacity to reduce the rate of capacity degradation, limiting the state of charge (SOC) up to 80% of capacity and never depleting the battery below 30%. GM also expected the battery to withstand 5,000 full discharges without losing more than 10% of its charge capacity. According to GM, as of August 2016 [ update ] , no batteries had been changed due to degradation.

In April 2008 GM started extensive battery testing. In two years, the carmaker put the battery packs to the equivalent of 150,000 real-world miles (240,000 km) and 10 years of use. The durability of the battery pack was tested for a broad range of extreme ambient conditions including a shaker table to simulate potholes and a thermal chamber, to simulate temperatures varying from 116 °F (47 °C) , typical of the Southwest deserts, to −40 °F (−40 °C) typical of the Alaskan tundra . In April 2008 the lithium-ion battery pack was placed in Chevrolet Malibus fitted with the Volt powertrain to be used as test mules for further real-world testing. In October 2008, GM chose CPI (LG Chemical) to provide the battery systems for the first production version of the Volt. In July 2008, GM confirmed that a non-turbocharged, 1.4 L 4-cylinder engine would be used as the range extender, and that the intention was to build it in Flint, Michigan . In April 2009, General Motors let journalists test the Volt powertrain without the range-extending generator in the body of Chevrolet Cruze sedans that GM used as test mules at the GM Technical Center in Warren, Michigan .

The first pre-production test car based on the final Volt design was built in June 2009, in Warren, Michigan, and by October 2009, 80 Volts had been built and were tested under various conditions. On March 31, 2010, the first factory-built Volt was produced at the Detroit Hamtramck Assembly Plant to test the production line and for quality control purposes, both of the tooling and the pre-production vehicles produced before regular production began.

Tony Posawatz was the Volt Vehicle Line Director from 2006 to 2012, and he was known as employee #1 and led the team from concept to production.

General Motors held a ceremony at its Detroit Hamtramck Assembly Plant on November 30, 2010, to introduce the first Chevrolet Volt off the assembly line. The first Volt built for retail sale was earmarked for display at GM's Heritage Center museum in Sterling Heights, Michigan . The second unit was offered at a public auction, with an opening bid of US$50,000 and it was won by Rick Hendrick who paid US$225,000 . The proceeds went to fund mathematics and sciences education in Detroit through the Detroit Public Schools Foundation. Deliveries to retail customers in the United States began in mid December 2010. Volt deliveries began in Canada in September 2011. The first deliveries of the Chevrolet Volt in Europe took place in November 2011. The European version of the Volt, the Opel Ampera, was released to retail customers in Europe in February 2012. Deliveries of the right-hand drive Vauxhall Ampera in the UK began in May 2012. The Holden Volt was released in Australia in December 2012.

The second generation Chevrolet Volt was unveiled at the January 2015 North American International Auto Show . Retail deliveries began in the United States and Canada in October 2015 as a 2016 model year , with 1,324 units delivered in the U.S. that month. Availability in the American market was limited to California and the other 10 states that follow California's zero emission vehicle regulations. GM scheduled the second generation as a 2017 model year to be released in the 39 remaining states by early 2016. Manufacturing of the 2017 MY Volt began in February 2016, and the first units arrived at dealerships at the end of February 2016. The 2017 model complied with stricter Tier 3 emissions requirements and was available nationwide.

The second generation Volt had an upgraded powertrain with a 1.5-liter engine that uses regular gasoline; the 18.4 kWh battery pack had new chemistry that stored 20% more electrical energy using fewer cells, 192 compared with 288 on the 2014 Volt. It had a new power controller that was integrated with the motor housing; the electric motors weighed 100 lb (45 kg) less and used smaller amounts of rare earth metals . GM engineers explained that the second generation Volt was developed with extensive input from Volt owners.

The improvements allowed the 2016 Volt to deliver better EPA ratings than the first generation model. The all-electric range was rated at 53 mi (85 km) , up from 38 mi (61 km) attained by the 2015 Volt. The gains in efficiency allowed the second generation to improve its combined fuel economy in gasoline-only ( charge-sustaining ) mode to 42 mpg ‑ US (5.6 L/100 km; 50 mpg ‑ imp ) , up from 37 mpg ‑ US (6.4 L/100 km; 44 mpg ‑ imp ) for the previous model. The second generation rating for combined city/highway fuel economy in all-electric mode was 106 miles per gallon gasoline equivalent (MPGe; 2.2 Le/100 km), up from 98 MPGe (2.4 Le/100 km) for the 2015 first generation model. The combined gasoline-electricity fuel economy rating of the 2016 model year Volt was 77 mpg ‑ US (3.1 L/100 km; 92 mpg ‑ imp ) equivalent , 82 MPGe (2.9 Le/100 km) in city driving and 72 MPGe (3.3 Le/100 km) in highway. Both the all-electric range and fuel economy ratings are the same for the 2017 model year Volt.

The second-generation Volt seats five rather than four, as in the first generation.

In July 2014, Opel announced that due to a slowdown in sales, they would discontinue the Ampera after the launch of the second generation Volt—and that between 2014 and 2018, Opel planned to introduce a successor electric vehicle in Europe. General Motors announced in February 2016 that the all-electric Opel Ampera-e hatchback would go into production in 2017. This is the European version of the Chevrolet Bolt EV .

In April 2015, General Motors confirmed that it would not build the second-generation Volt in right-hand-drive configuration. Only 246 units had been sold in Australia by mid-April 2015, and the Holden Volt was discontinued once the remaining stock was sold.

Awards received by the Volt included the following:

U.S. organizations

International organizations

European organizations

Rest of the world organizations

A total of 2,208 people sailed on the maiden voyage of the RMS Titanic , the second of the White Star Line 's Olympic -class ocean liners, from Southampton , England, to New York City . Partway through the voyage, the ship struck an iceberg and sank in the early morning of 15 April 1912, resulting in the deaths of 1,496 passengers and crew.

The ship's passengers were separated into three separate classes determined by the price of their ticket: those travelling in first class—most of them the wealthiest passengers on board—including prominent members of the upper class, businessmen, politicians, high-ranking military personnel, industrialists, bankers, entertainers, socialites, and professional athletes. Second-class passengers were predominantly middle-class travelers and included professors, authors, clergymen, and tourists. Third-class or steerage passengers were primarily immigrants moving to the United States and Canada.

The Titanic ' s first-class list was a " who's who " of the prominent upper class in 1912. A single-person berth in first class cost between £30 ( equivalent to £3,000 in 2025 ) and £870 ( equivalent to £86,000 in 2025 ) for a parlour suite and small private promenade deck . First-class passengers enjoyed a number of amenities, including a gymnasium, a squash court, a saltwater swimming pool, electric and Victorian-style Turkish baths , a barbershop, kennels for first-class dogs, elevators, and both open and enclosed promenades. First-class passengers also traveled accompanied by personal staff—valets, maids, nurses and governesses for the children, chauffeurs, and cooks.

Many members of the British aristocracy made the trip: The Countess of Rothes , wife of the 19th Earl of Rothes, embarked at Southampton with her parents, Thomas and Clementina Dyer-Edwardes, and cousin Gladys Cherry . Colonel Archibald Gracie IV , a real estate investor and member of the wealthy Scottish-American Gracie family, embarked at Southampton. The Cavendishes of London were among other prominent British couples on board, as well. Lord Pirrie , chairman of Harland and Wolff , intended to travel aboard the Titanic , but illness prevented him from joining the ill-fated voyage; however, White Star Line's managing director J. Bruce Ismay and the ship's Harland and Wolff designer, Thomas Andrews , were both on board to oversee the ship's progress on her maiden voyage.

Some of the most prominent members of the American social elite made the trip: 47-year-old real estate builder, businessman, and multimillionaire Colonel John Jacob Astor IV and his 18-year-old pregnant wife Madeleine were returning to the United States for their child's birth. Astor was the wealthiest passenger aboard the ship and one of the richest men in the world; his great-grandfather John Jacob Astor was the first multi-millionaire in North America. Among others were industrialist magnate and millionaire Benjamin Guggenheim ; Macy's department store owner, and former member of the United States House of Representatives Isidor Straus , and his wife Ida ; George Dennick Wick , founder and president of Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company ; millionaire streetcar magnate George Dunton Widener ; John B. Thayer , vice president of Pennsylvania Railroad , and his wife, Marian ; Charles Hays , president of Canada's Grand Trunk Railway ; William Ernest Carter and his wife, American socialite Lucile Carter ; millionaire, philanthropist and women's rights activist Margaret Brown ; tennis star and banker Karl Behr ; famous American silent film actress Dorothy Gibson ; prominent Buffalo architect Edward Austin Kent ; and President William Howard Taft 's military aide, Major Archibald Butt , who was returning to resume his duties after a six-week trip to Europe. Swedish first class passenger and businessman Mauritz Björnström-Steffansson owned the most highly valued single object on board: a masterpiece of French neoclassical painting entitled La Circassienne au Bain , for which he would later claim US$100,000 in compensation (equivalent to US$ 3.3 million in 2025 ).

Milton S. Hershey , founder of Hershey's chocolate, made plans to sail aboard the ship's maiden voyage, but cancelled his booking before the ship set sail. J. P. Morgan was also reported to have been planning to make the voyage but changed his plans at the last-minute.

Second-class passengers were leisure tourists, academics, members of the clergy, and middle-class British and American families. The ship's musicians traveled in second-class accommodations; they were not counted as members of the crew, but were employed by an agency under contract to the White Star Line. The average ticket price for an adult second-class passenger was £13 ( equivalent to £1,300 in 2025 ). and for many of these passengers, their travel experience on the Titanic was akin to travelling first class on smaller liners. Second-class passengers had their own library and the men had access to a private smoking room. Second-class children could read the children's books provided in the library or play deck quoits and shuffleboard on the second-class promenade. Twelve-year-old Ruth Becker passed the time by pushing her two-year-old brother Richard around the enclosed promenade in a stroller provided by the White Star Line.

Two Roman Catholic priests on board, Father Thomas Byles and Father Joseph Peruschitz , celebrated mass every day for second- and third-class passengers during the voyage. Father Byles gave his homilies in English, Irish, and French and Father Peruschitz gave his in German and Hungarian. Father Byles reportedly perished in the sinking, performing blessings and last rites for those trapped.

On the ship, a Lithuanian priest, Father Juozas Montvila , also perished during the sinking.

Rev. John Harper , a well-known Baptist pastor from Scotland, was travelling to the United States with his daughter and sister to preach at the Moody Church in Chicago.

Schoolteacher Lawrence Beesley , a science master at Dulwich College , spent much of his time aboard the ship in the library. Two months after the sinking, he wrote and published The Loss of the SS Titanic , the first eyewitness account of the disaster.

The Laroche family, father Joseph and daughters Simone and Louise, were the only known passengers of black ancestry on board the ship. They, along with Joseph's pregnant wife Juliette, were travelling to Joseph's native island of Haiti . Joseph hoped that a move from their former home in Paris back to Haiti, where his uncle Cincinnatus Leconte was president, would take his family away from racial discrimination.

Another French family travelling in second class was the Navratils, travelling under the assumed name Hoffman. Michel Navratil, a Slovak-born French tailor, had kidnapped his two young sons, Michel Jr. and Edmond from his estranged wife, assumed the name Charles Hoffman, and boarded the ship in Southampton, intent on taking his children to the United States. Michel Sr. died in the sinking and photographs of the boys were circulated throughout the world in the hopes that their mother or another relative could identify the French toddlers, who became known as the "Titanic Orphans". After arriving in New York, the children were cared for by Titanic survivor Margaret Hays until their mother, Marcelle Navratil traveled from Nice , France, to claim them. The last living second-class survivor was Barbara West ; she was 10 months old at the time of sinking and died in 2007 at the age of 96.

The third-class passengers or steerage passengers left hoping to start new lives in the United States and Canada. Third-class passengers paid £7 ( equivalent to £700 in 2025 ) for their ticket, depending on their place of origin; ticket prices often included the price of rail travel to the three departure ports. Tickets for children cost £3 ( equivalent to £300 in 2025 ).

Third-class passengers were a diverse group of nationalities and ethnic groups. In addition to large numbers of British, Irish, and Scandinavian immigrants, other passengers were from Central and Eastern Europe, the Levant (Greater Syria), and Hong Kong. Some traveled alone or in small family groups. Several groups of mothers were travelling alone with their young children, including the Lefebvres, the Pålssons, and the Panulas. Most were going to join their husbands, who had already gone to America to find jobs, and having saved enough money, could now send for their families.

Among the larger third-class families were John and Annie Sage, who were immigrating to Jacksonville, Florida, with their 9 children, ranging in age from 4 to 20 years; Anders and Alfrida Andersson of Sweden and their five children, who were travelling to Canada along with Alfrida's younger sister Anna, husband Ernst, and baby Gilbert; and Frederick and Augusta Goodwin, who were moving with their six children to his new job at a power plant in New York. In 2007, scientists using DNA analysis identified the body of a small, fair-haired toddler, one of the first victims to be recovered by the CS Mackay Bennett , as Frederick and Augusta's youngest child, 19-month-old Sidney . The Sages, Anderssons and Goodwins all perished in the sinking.

The youngest passenger on board the ship, 2-month-old Millvina Dean , who with her parents Bertram Sr. and Eva Dean and older brother Bertram, was emigrating from England to Kansas, died in 2009. She was the last survivor of the Titanic disaster to die.

To compete with rival shipping company Cunard , the White Star Line offered their steerage passengers modest luxuries, in the hopes that emigrants would write to relatives back home and encourage them to travel on White Star Line ships. Third-class passengers had their own dining facilities, with chairs instead of benches, and meals prepared by the third-class kitchen staff. On other liners, the steerage-passengers would have been expected to bring their own food.

Rather than dormitory-style sleeping areas, third-class passengers had their own cabins. The single men and women were separated, women in the stern in two to six berth cabins, men in the bow in up to 10 berth cabins, often shared with strangers. Each stateroom was fitted with wood panelling and beds with mattresses, blankets, pillows, electric lights, heat, and a washbasin with running water, except for the bow cabins, which did not have a private washbasin. Two public bathtubs were also provided, one for the men, the other for women.

Passengers gathered in the third-class common room, where they could play chess or cards, or walk along the poop deck . Third-class children played in the common room or explored the ship. Nine-year-old Frank Goldsmith recalled peering into the engine room and climbing up the baggage cranes on the poop deck.

Numerous notable and prominent people of the era, who held tickets for the westbound passage or were guests of those who held tickets, did not sail. Others were waiting in New York to board for the passage back to Plymouth , England, on the second leg of Titanic ' s maiden voyage. Many of the unused tickets that survived, whether they were for the westbound passage or the return eastbound passage, have become quite valuable as Titanic -related artifacts. Those who held tickets for a passage, but did not actually sail, include Theodore Dreiser , Henry Clay Frick , Milton S. Hershey , Guglielmo Marconi , J. P. Morgan , John Mott , George Washington Vanderbilt II , Edgar Selwyn , and ʻAbdu'l-Bahá .

The Laroche family, father Joseph Philippe Lemercier Laroche and daughters Simone and Louise, were the only known passengers of Black ancestry on board the ship. They, along with Joseph's pregnant wife Juliette, were travelling to Joseph's native island of Haiti. Joseph hoped that a move from their former home in Paris back to Haiti, where his uncle Cincinnatus Leconte was president, would take his family away from racial discrimination.

According to official data from Lloyd's insurance company, 38 of the passengers aboard the Titanic , were Bulgarians . There are assumptions that the number of Bulgarian citizens exceeds 50.

Near the town of Troyan , there is a cenotaph monument to the 8 inhabitants of the village of Gumoshtnik who died, whose names were probably not on the list of the insurance company. The estimated number of surviving Bulgarians is 15, with many remaining in the United States. In memory of the Bulgarians who died on the Titanic from the village of Terziysko – Minko Angelov and Hristo Danchev – a folk song was created.

Eight passengers are listed on the passenger list with a home country of China , from the hometown of Hong Kong , with a destination of New York. Six of these men survived the disaster. After their rescue, the six survivors disembarked from the Carpathia on Ellis Island and joined the Donald Line ship Annetta . One of the Chinese survivors, Fang Lang (real name Wing Sun Fong), was one of the four men whom Fifth Officer Harold Lowe rescued from the water after returning in Lifeboat 14 to search for any survivors still stranded in the sea. Fong eventually settled in the US, and fellow survivor Lee Bing moved to Canada, settling in Galt, Ontario . The stories of the Chinese survivors, which were forgotten for over a century, were presented in a 2021 documentary film, The Six , after researchers worked to piece together their whereabouts and lives after the sinking. A book complementing the documentary was published in 2025.

The number of Croatian passengers was 37, while only three of them were saved. They are, Mara Osman Banski from Vagovina near Čazma , Ivan Jalševac from Topolovac near Sisak , and Nikola Lulić from Konjsko Brdo near Perušić , all in Croatia-Slavonia , part of the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen of the Kingdom of Hungary , Austria-Hungary .

There were at least 69 known Jewish passengers aboard the Titanic , though the number is likely to be much higher. Of those 69 confirmed, 39 perished in the sinking. At least one crew member was Jewish: Second class barber Herbert Klein, who did not survive. It is known that the White Star Line provided a kosher menu for Jewish passengers and also provided utensils marked in both English and Hebrew.

Jewish passengers were in every class and represented a variety of nationalities, including Poland , England , the United States and the Russian Empire . Notable Jewish passengers include Eva Hart and her parents Esther and Benjamin in second class; Ida and Isidor Straus , founder of Macy's store and his wife; Benjamin Guggenheim , one of the richest men in the world at the time; Herman Klaber , founder of Klaber Hop Fields ; journalist Edith Rosenbaum ; and Broadway producer Renee Harris . Most Jewish passengers, however, were in the third class, the majority of whom were immigrating to the United States.

There were more than 80 passengers from the Ottoman Empire , including Turkish , Armenian and Levantine backgrounds. At the time, many carried identification from the Ottoman Empire that stated they were from the region of Syria , which included Palestine , Jordan , Lebanon , and Syria .

According to Bakhos Assaf, mayor of Hardine, Lebanon, 93 passengers originated from what is today Lebanon, with 20 of them from Hardine , the highest number of any Lebanese location. Of the Hardine passengers, 11 adult men died, while eight women and children and one adult man survived. Kamal Seikaly, an individual quoted in an article from the Lebanese publication The Daily Star , stated that according to a 16 May 1912, issue of the Al-Khawater magazine stored in the American University of Beirut , of the 125 Lebanese aboard, 23 survived. The magazine states that 10 people from Kfar Meshki died on the Titanic . According to author Judith Geller, "officially [there] were 154 Syrians on board the Titanic and 29 were saved: four men, five children, and 20 women".

In 1997, Ray Hanania , a Palestinian American journalist, watched the Titanic (1997) film and noticed some background characters saying yalla , meaning "hurry" in Arabic. This prompted him to research the issue and he discovered that Arab passengers were on board. In 1998, he wrote a column about the Arabs on the Titanic , "Titanic: We Share the Pain But Not the Glory." According to Hanania's analysis, 79 Arab passengers were on board the ship, though the task to "identify precisely" which passengers were Arab is difficult. Hanania stated that many were Christians because church sponsorship made getting passage easier for Christians as opposed to Muslims, and Christians were more likely to emigrate due to persecution by the Ottoman regime. An in-depth study was made by Leila Salloum Elias about the lives of Syrian, as well as Armenian passengers aboard the ship, using volumes of research taken from Arabic newspapers contemporary to the sinking to clarify the names and circumstances of many Syrian passengers. The total number of Syrian passengers, according to Syrian survivors was between 145 and 165, of these, only one couple who boarded as second-class passengers. Salloum's passenger count is based on the contemporary sources of the sinking in which names are clarified and given based on their true and authentic Arabic names, families and village, town or city of origin.

Four Portuguese passengers traveled and all died aboard the Titanic : José Joaquim de Brito, a second-class passenger who boarded in Southampton with the ticket 244360 bought for £13 from São Clemente , Loulé , Portugal , who lived and worked at the London agency of the banking firm Pinto Leite & Nephews, with offices in Manchester , Liverpool and London, and married to Mariana Teresa do Carmo (who died in the day before his 41st birthday), and three Madeiran farmers , Domingos Fernandes Coelho, from Funchal (aged 20), José Neto Jardim, from Calheta (aged 21), and Manuel Gonçalves Estanislau, from Calheta (aged 37), who were in third-class. Their bodies, if recovered, were never identified.

On the night of 14 April 1912, around 11:40 pm, while the Titanic was sailing about 400 mi (640 km) south of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland , the ship struck an iceberg and began to sink. Shortly before midnight, Captain Edward Smith ordered the ship's lifeboats to be readied and a distress call was sent out. The closest ship to respond was Cunard Line 's Carpathia 58 mi (93 km) away, which would arrive in an estimated 4 hours—too late to rescue all of Titanic ' s passengers. Forty-five minutes after the ship hit the iceberg, Captain Smith ordered the lifeboats to be loaded and lowered under the orders women and children first .

The first lifeboat launched was Lifeboat 7 on the starboard side. It was lowered around 12:45 am as believed by the British Inquiry. Collapsible Boat D was the last lifeboat to be launched, at 1:55. Two more lifeboats, Collapsibles Boat A and Boat B , were in the process of being removed from their location on the roof of the officer's house, but could not be properly launched. Collapsible B floated away from the ship upside down, while Collapsible A became half-filled with water after the supports for its canvas sides were broken in the fall from the roof of the officers' quarters. Arguments occurred in some of the lifeboats about going back to pick up people in the water, but many survivors were afraid of being swamped by people trying to climb into the lifeboat or being pulled down by the suction from the sinking Titanic , and discouraged those in charge of the boats from returning to the wrecksite. At 2:20 am, Titanic herself sank. Fifth Officer Harold Lowe , after transferring passengers in Lifeboat 14 to other nearby lifeboats, did return to the wrecksite and managed to pull out four survivors, one of whom died soon after.

After the ship sank, a small number of passengers and crew who had still been aboard were able to make their way to the two unlaunched collapsible boats, some of them surviving until daybreak. The survivors of Boat A, numbering around 12, were rescued by Fifth Officer Lowe who spotted the boat after finishing Lifeboat 14's search of the wrecksite, while Second Officer Charles Lightoller , on Boat B, used his officer's whistle to attract the attention of nearby Lifeboats 4 and 12 who rowed over and took of the survivors, numbering around 24, of the overturned collapsible.

At 4:10 am, Carpathia arrived at the site of the sinking and began rescuing survivors. By 8:30 am, she picked up the last lifeboat with survivors and left the area at 08:50 bound for Pier 54 in New York City. Of the 712 passengers and crew rescued by the Carpathia , six, including first-class passenger William F. Hoyt, either died in a lifeboat during the night or on board the Carpathia the next morning, and were buried at sea .

In the days following the sinking, several ships sailed to the disaster area to recover victims' bodies. The White Star Line chartered the cable ship Mackay-Bennett from Halifax, Nova Scotia , to retrieve bodies. Three other ships followed in the search: the cable ship CS Minia , the lighthouse supply ship Montmagny , and the sealing vessel Algerine . Each ship left with embalming supplies, undertakers, and clergy. Upon recovery, each body retrieved by the Mackay-Bennett was numbered and given as detailed a description as possible to help aid in identification. The physical appearance of each body—height, weight, age, hair and eye colour, visible birthmarks, scars or tattoos, was catalogued and any personal effects on the bodies were gathered and placed in small canvas bags corresponding to their number.

The ship found such a large number of bodies – 306 – that the embalming supplies aboard were quickly exhausted. Health regulations permitted that only embalmed bodies could be returned to port. Captain Larnder of the Mackay-Bennett and the undertakers aboard decided to preserve all bodies of first-class passengers because of the need to visually identify wealthy men to resolve any disputes over large estates. As a result, the majority of the 116 burials at sea were third-class passengers and crew (only 56 were identified). Larnder himself claimed that as a mariner, he would expect to be buried at sea. However, complaints about the burials at sea were made by families and undertakers. Later ships such as Minia found fewer bodies, requiring fewer embalming supplies, and were able to limit burials at sea to bodies that were too damaged to preserve. [ citation needed ]

190 bodies recovered were preserved and taken to Halifax, Nova Scotia , the closest city to the sinking with direct rail and steamship connections. A large temporary morgue was set up in a curling rink, and undertakers were called in from all across Eastern Canada to assist. Relatives from across North America came to identify and claim the bodies of their relatives. Some bodies were shipped to be buried in their home towns across North America and Europe. About two-thirds of the bodies were identified. Of the remaining 150 unclaimed bodies, 121 were taken to the non-denominational Fairview Lawn Cemetery ; 19 were buried in the Roman Catholic Mount Olivet Cemetery , and 10 were taken to the Jewish Baron de Hirsch Cemetery . Unidentified victims were buried with simple numbers based on the order in which their bodies were discovered. [ citation needed ]

In mid-May 1912, over 200 mi (320 km) from the site of the sinking, RMS Oceanic recovered three bodies, numbers 331, 332, and 333, who were occupants of Collapsible A, which was swamped in the last moments of the sinking. Although numerous people managed to reach this lifeboat, several died during the night from hypothermia and, in most cases, their bodies pushed off to keep the boat afloat. When Fifth Officer Lowe and the crew of Lifeboat 14 returned to pick up survivors, they rescued surviving passengers from Collapsible A, but Lowe decided to leave the three dead bodies in the boat, covering them up with lifebelts. Only one of the bodies, that of first-class passeenger Thomson Beattie, was identified. The other two were determined to be unidentified crew members. After their retrieval of Collapsible A, the crew of the Oceanic buried the decomposed bodies at sea.

The following is a full list of known passengers who sailed on the maiden voyage of the Titanic .

Included in this list are the nine-member Guarantee Group and the eight members of the ship's band, listed as both passengers and crew. They are also included in the list of crew members on board Titanic .

Passengers are colour-coded, indicating whether they were saved or perished. The passenger did not survive The passenger survived Survivors are listed with the lifeboat from which they were thought to be rescued, and many are not considered definitive. Victims whose remains were recovered after the sinking are listed with a superscript next to the body number, indicating the recovery vessel:

Numbers 324 and 325 were unused, and the six bodies buried at sea by the Carpathia also went unnumbered.

In addition to the above-listed passengers, the Titanic carried 29 cross-channel passengers who boarded at Southampton and disembarked at either Cherbourg , France, or Queenstown , Ireland .

The West Virginia Mountaineers football team represents West Virginia University (WVU) in the NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) of college football . West Virginia plays its home games at Milan Puskar Stadium on the campus of West Virginia University in Morgantown, West Virginia . The Mountaineers have won or shared a total of 15 conference championships, including eight Southern Conference titles and seven Big East Conference titles. The Mountaineers compete in the Big 12 Conference .

The West Virginia University football program traces its origin back to November 28, 1891, when its first team fell to Washington & Jefferson 72–0 on a converted cow pasture. Despite its humble beginning, West Virginia enjoyed a 25–23–3 overall record prior to 1900, which proved to be a fruitful century of Mountaineer football.  The early 1900s brought about early successes for the program, namely during the 1903 and 1905 seasons when WVU posted records of 7–1 and 8–1 respectively. WVU produced a 6–3 record in the 1904 season, despite losing to Penn State , Pitt , and Michigan by a combined score of 217–0. The 1908–20 period produced the four-year head coaching tenures of C.A. Lueder (1908–11) and Mont McIntire (1916–17, 1919–20), representing the longest coaching tenures during this early period of Mountaineer football.  Lueder's Mountaineers produced a 17–13–3 record, while McIntire's teams produced the most success of any Mountaineer team prior to 1921, compiling a 24–11–4 record including an 8–2 finish in 1919.

That same Mountaineer team also produced West Virginia's first ever Consensus All-American and potential College Football Hall of Fame inductee, Ira Errett Rodgers . Rodgers scored 19 touchdowns and kicked 33 extra points for WVU in 1919 season, leading the nation with 147 total points.  Rodgers also threw 11 touchdown passes that season, an unheard of feat at the time and a Mountaineer record until 1949. The Mountaineers enjoyed their first period of success during the 1920s, coinciding with the successful coaching tenures of Clarence Spears (1921–24) and Ira Errett Rodgers (1925–30, 1943–45).  Under the tutelage of Spears, West Virginia compiled a 30–6–3 record with its best performance coming in the 1922 season.  The 1922 edition of the Mountaineers remains the only team in West Virginia history to produce an unbeaten season, finishing with a 10–0–1 mark. Spears's Mountaineers surrendered only 34 total points in 1922, posting six consecutive shutouts to finish the regular season. The 1922 season also produced notable victories against rival Pitt and against Gonzaga in the East-West Bowl , the program's first bowl game appearance. Offensive tackle Russell Meredith garnered First-Team All-American honors.  In homage to the successes of the 1922 season, West Virginia University undertook construction of what became the first incarnation of Mountaineer Field .

The Mountaineers continued their success under Spears in posting subsequent one-loss seasons in 1923 (7–1–1) and in 1924 (8–1), with Spears departing the program for Minnesota thereafter.  Ira Errett Rodgers replaced Spears and the Mountaineers posted an 8–1 record in 1925.  After a 6–4 finish in 1926 and a 2–4–3 record in 1927, the program produced an 8–2 finish in 1928. Rodgers's first tenure as West Virginia coach ended with records of 4–3–3 in 1929 and 5–5 in 1930. Taking over for Rodgers in 1931 was Earle "Greasy" Neale , but his tenure was short-lived as the Mountaineers failed to produce a single winning season under his guise, going a combined 12–16–3 over Neale's three years as coach. Charles Tallman , an End who achieved All-American status with the Mountaineers in 1923 with the Mountaineers, replaced Neale in 1934 and produced immediate results as the program posted 6–4 records in 1934 and 1936. Although West Virginia posted a 3–4–2 record in 1935, the program produced an All-American in Joe Stydahar , an offensive tackle . "Jumbo Joe" later became both a College Football Hall of Fame and Pro Football Hall of Fame inductee. Despite his winning record, Tallman resigned after the 1936 season to pursue his career in law enforcement as Superintendent of the West Virginia State Police . Marshall Glenn picked up right where Tallman left off, leading West Virginia to an 8–1–1 record in 1937.  The season concluded with an upset of Texas Tech in the 1938 Sun Bowl . Running back Harry Clarke led the way for the Mountaineers that season, rushing for a then school record 921 yards and 10 touchdowns. Glenn's success was short-lived, however, as subsequent WVU teams posted losing records of 4–5–1 in 1938 and 2–6–1 in 1939, leading to his ouster. West Virginia experienced a lag in success during much of the 1940s, producing only three winning seasons while witnessing the split coaching tenures of Bill Kern (1940–42, 1946–47) and the second appearance of Ira Errett Rodgers (1943–45). Under the direction of head coach Dudley DeGroot in the 1948 season, the Mountaineers returned to prominence with a 9–3 finish, adding another Sun Bowl victory to its resume with a 21–12 defeat of Texas Western (now known as UTEP). Despite that successful first season at the program's helm, DeGroot resigned after a disappointing 4–6–1 finish in 1949.

When Art "Pappy" Lewis became West Virginia's head coach in 1950, he remarked that it was the job that he had always wanted. Known by his peers as an exceptional recruiter and by his players as a father figure, Lewis established a family-like atmosphere within the Mountaineer football program. Lewis's Mountaineer teams held true to form, experiencing their most consistent success during the 1950s as it ever had previously.  After forgettable campaigns in 1950 and '1951, the 1952 season brought WVU its first winning season since 1948.  The Mountaineers finished with a 7–2 record, highlighted by a 16–0 upset victory of No. 18 Pitt in Pittsburgh.

Beginning with the 1953 season , the Mountaineers would reel off three consecutive eight-win seasons and five Southern Conference (SoCon) championships in six seasons. In 1953, the Mountaineers finished with an 8–2 record, their first SoCon championship, a No. 10 ranking in the Associated Press (AP) Poll , and a berth in the Sugar Bowl with Georgia Tech . The 1954 edition of the Mountaineers also finished the regular season with an 8–1 mark, losing their only game to Pitt by a 13–10 score.  The Mountaineers did not earn a bowl bid, however, despite winning their second consecutive SoCon title and earning a No. 12 ranking in the AP Poll. In 1955 , the Mountaineers engineered yet another eight-win season and SoCon championship, but upset losses to Pitt and Syracuse doomed West Virginia's shot at a bowl bid. Despite its disappointing finish, WVU produced two All-American offensive linemen and future College Football Hall of Fame inductees in Bruce Bosley and Sam Huff . Bosley earned Consensus All-American status that season, becoming the first Mountaineer to do so since Ira Errett Rodgers in 1919.

Despite finishing with a modest 6–4 record in 1956, West Virginia won its fourth consecutive SoCon title with a 5–0 record in conference play. The 1957 season resulted in a 7–2–1 record and a 3–0 mark in Southern Conference play. Although the Mountaineers once again compiled an undefeated SoCon record, they were not awarded the conference championship, as VMI earned the title with a 9–0–1 overall record and 6–0 record in SoCon play. In 1958, the Mountaineers had their first losing season in eight years, but their 4–0 record in SoCon play earned them a 5th conference title in six seasons. The 1958 season was the final season that West Virginia would win a conference championship under Lewis's tenure. The Mountaineers finished 3–7 in 1959, losing the final five games of the season by a combined score of 24–140. Lewis resigned as head coach afterward. Despite the program's drop off in success in his final two seasons as coach, Lewis produced 58 victories overall during his tenure at West Virginia, placing him fourth overall in the program's history.

After Lewis's departure, the program hit an all-time low in 1960 under first-year head coach Gene Corum , posting its worst season to date: 0–8–2. The Mountaineers were simply outclassed by their opponents, being outscored 40–259 on the season. The Mountaineers rebounded, however, and by 1962 were back to their winning ways, posting an 8–2 record and 4–0 conference record. Despite their undefeated conference record, once again the SoCon crown eluded the Mountaineers in favor of the VMI Keydets and their 6–0 record in conference play. West Virginia did not have to wait long for its next SoCon title, however, as the program won the title in the 1964 and 1965 seasons consecutively.  The Mountaineers finished 7–4 in 1964 and participated in the Liberty Bowl against Utah , West Virginia's first bowl game in 11 years as well as the first major college football bowl game ever played indoors and to be broadcast nationwide in the United States . Corum's tenure ended thereafter, posting a 29–30–2 record over his six seasons as head coach. Corum's legacy went well beyond wins and losses, however, as he integrated WVU football in 1963 with the program's first African-American recruits in Roger Alford and Dick Leftridge .

Following the 1965 season, Jim Carlen took over for Corum as head coach.  After a 3–5–2 finish in 1966 , Carlen guided the Mountaineers to their 8th and final SoCon championship in 1967 . West Virginia left the Southern Conference thereafter, participating as an independent until 1991. Carlen's Mountaineers would produce subsequent winning seasons in 1968 and 1969, posting records of 7–3 and 10–1, respectively.  The 1969 edition of the Mountaineers was the most successful West Virginia team since the 1922 season. Not only did the Mountaineers win 10 games, but they earned their first bowl game victory since 1948 with a Peach Bowl victory over No. 19 South Carolina , as well as a No. 18 final ranking in the Coaches Poll . The dynamic rushing tandem of running back Bob Gresham (1,155 yards and 9 touchdowns) and fullback Jim Braxton (843 yards, 12 touchdowns) led the Mountaineers. Gresham became the second Mountaineer to ever rush for more than 1,000 yards ( Garrett Ford, Sr. was the first with 1,068 yards in 1966). At the conclusion of the 1969 season, Carlen departed West Virginia for Texas Tech . The Mountaineers responded by hiring Bobby Bowden .

It appeared that the Bobby Bowden era of Mountaineer football could not have begun more smoothly early in the 1970 season , or so it seemed. The Mountaineers were 4–1 to start the season and led arch rival Pitt 35–8 at halftime in week six. What transpired was one of the most infamous collapses in Backyard Brawl and West Virginia football history.  The Mountaineers surrendered 28 unanswered points, losing to the Panthers 36–35 and leading Bowden to remark that he had "embarrassed the whole state of West Virginia" in the process. Despite the disappointment of the Pitt defeat, West Virginia went on to finish the 1970 season with an 8–3 record. Fullback Jim Braxton and linebacker Dale Farley earned All-American honors.

The Mountaineers continued their winning ways under Bowden in 1971 and 1972, posting records of 7–4 and 8–4 respectively.  The 1972 West Virginia team earned the program's first trip back to a bowl game in three years, participating once again in the Peach Bowl against North Carolina State . The season also witnessed the offensive prowess of running back Kerry Marbury and wide receiver Danny Buggs . Marbury ran for 16 touchdowns in 1972, a record that remained unbroken until 2002. Buggs recorded 35 receptions for 791 yards and eight touchdowns, ran for four touchdowns, and returned two punts for touchdowns to amass 14 total touchdowns.

The 1973 and 1974 seasons, however, were not successful campaigns for the Mountaineers, as they finished with records of 6–5 and 4–7.  Despite the disappointment of those seasons, Danny Buggs earned All-American status for his contributions in both campaigns.  The 1975 season was successful as the Mountaineers compiled a 9–3 record, a 13–10 Peach Bowl victory over North Carolina State, and a final ranking of No. 17 in the Coaches Poll and No. 20 in the AP Poll. Additionally, the Mountaineers upset the No. 20 Pitt Panthers 17–14 on a game-winning field goal in the closing seconds in yet another memorable chapter of the Backyard Brawl. Bowden later described the victory as one of the most exciting ones of his coaching career. Following the 1975 season, Bowden left WVU to become the head coach at Florida State , where he would become the second winningest coach in NCAA Division I-A/FBS history.  In just six seasons with the Mountaineers, Bowden produced a 42–26 record, good for fifth all-time in the program. Bowden's departure not only signaled the end of his tenure at West Virginia, but to the end of WVU's winning ways in the 1970s.

Under the direction of Frank Cignetti , the Mountaineers endured four consecutive losing seasons. West Virginia completed the 1976 season with a 5–6 record, losing four of its final six games. The disappointment of 1976 was realized again the following season, as the Mountaineers posted another 5–6 finish in 1977 .  After a promising 4–1 start to the season, including an upset road victory over No. 11 Maryland, WVU lost five of its final six games. The Mountaineers finished 2–9 in 1978 , being outscored 364–167. It was later revealed that Cignetti had suffered from a rare form of cancer during the season, nearly losing his life on the operating table during a procedure to remove his spleen in the winter of 1978. The 1979 season was Cignetti's final with the program. The Mountaineers produced another 5–6 finish, losing their first three games and later dropping three out of their final four games.

Despite the program's losing seasons during Cignetti's tenure, Cignetti managed to land prized recruit and future Consensus All-American linebacker Darryl Talley , as well as standout quarterback and future Athletic Director Oliver Luck and running back Robert Alexander .  Cignetti's coaching staffs also consisted of some of the best coaches in college football, including Nick Saban , Joe Pendry and Rick Trickett (who, along with Rich Rodriguez , was later credited as an innovator in utilizing the zone blocking scheme in conjunction with the run-based spread offense at WVU). However, with a 17–27 record during his four years with the program, and in having to follow in the footsteps of the great Bobby Bowden (who later became the second all-time leader in victories amongst NCAA FBS coaches), Cignetti's legacy is one of the most conflicted in the program's history.

In the wake of Frank Cignetti's firing, the West Virginia Athletic Department determined that a full rebuild was in order. On December 10, 1979, West Virginia introduced Don Nehlen as its new head coach, the 30th coach in the program's history. Coinciding with Nehlen's hire was the construction of the second incarnation of Mountaineer Field , the program's current home stadium. Nehlen brought several changes to the Mountaineer football program, including a new logo and color scheme that remains in use to this day. The result was consistency and success for the program during his two-decade tenure at West Virginia.  After a 6–6 campaign in 1980 , Nehlen's 1981 Mountaineer team produced the first of 15 winning seasons under his direction.  It also marked the first of three consecutive nine-win seasons and four consecutive bowl game appearances for the Mountaineers.  Led by senior quarterback Oliver Luck 's 2,448 yards passing and 16 touchdowns, the 1981 team posted a 9–3 record and earned a trip back to the Peach Bowl , where they defeated the Florida Gators 26–6. WVU also finished ranked in the polls for the first time since 1975, coming in at No. 17 and No. 18 in the AP and Coaches Polls, respectively.

The 1982 Mountaineers experienced similar success.  Sparked by their come-from-behind upset victory over No. 9 Oklahoma to open the season, the Mountaineers finished with a 9–2 record, remaining ranked in the AP poll throughout the season en route to a Gator Bowl berth with Bobby Bowden and Florida State .  Despite its Gator Bowl loss, West Virginia once again finished the season 9–3 and ranked 19th in both final polls. The team also produced the program's first Consensus All-American since 1955 in senior linebacker Darryl Talley .  The Mountaineers won their first six games at the outset of the 1983 season , attaining a No. 4 ranking in the AP Poll. With a 41–23 upset loss to 1983 in week 8, however, West Virginia's hopes of an undefeated season collapsed. WVU lost three of its final five regular season games before defeating Kentucky in the Hall of Fame Classic to finish the season at 9–3. It was the third consecutive season for WVU to finish ranked, coming in at No. 16 in both the AP and Coaches Polls. Quarterback Jeff Hostetler led the offensive attack with 2,345 yards passing and 16 touchdowns, while Kicker Paul Woodside received All-American honors in converting 21 of 25 field goal attempts and all 37 of his extra point attempts en route to a team-leading 100 points.

Although the 1984 season had all off the makings of a memorable one for West Virginia, the Mountaineers experienced another letdown.  WVU started the season with a 7–1 record, posting an upset victory over No. 4 Boston College and its first victory over Penn State in 25 meetings along the way.  The Mountaineers were upset in each of their final three regular season games, however, losing to Virginia, Rutgers and Temple. WVU rebounded to defeat Texas Christian in the Bluebonnet Bowl , finishing the season at 8–4 with a No. 21 ranking in the final Coaches poll.  The Mountaineers also produced three All-Americans in return specialist Willie Drewrey , kicker Paul Woodside , and tight end Rob Bennett. After four consecutive seasons of bowl berths and finishes in at least one of the polls, West Virginia went on a two-year drought in 1985 and 1986 , finishing those seasons with records of 7–3–1 and 4–7 (Nehlen's first of only four losing seasons) respectively.  The shortcomings of those seasons came to a head in 1987 , where the Mountaineers endured a season of growing pains and near-misses.  Despite a 1–3 start, West Virginia rallied to finish the regular season at 6–5 with four of its five losses coming by deficits of 5 points or less. Freshman quarterback Major Harris led the way for the Mountaineers, compiling 16 total touchdowns and providing glimpses of what was to come in his illustrious collegiate career. The season culminated in a 35–33 loss to No. 11 Oklahoma State in the Sun Bowl , a game in which the Mountaineers led 24–14 at halftime and lost on a failed two-point conversion attempt with 1:13 remaining.

The 1988 edition of the Mountaineers achieved an undefeated regular season, compiling 11 wins for the first time in its history. The success of the regular season culminated in West Virginia's first and only trip to a National Championship Game in its history, where the No. 3 Mountaineers met No. 1 Notre Dame in the Fiesta Bowl . Notre Dame went on to win 34–21 and claimed the national championship.  West Virginia finished the 1988 campaign ranked No. 5 in both the AP and Coaches Polls.  Major Harris compiled 610 yards rushing, 1,915 yards passing, and 20 total touchdowns on the season. Coming off of its first ever 11-win season and with junior Major Harris returning to lead a potent offense, West Virginia entered the 1989 season with high expectations and a No. 17 ranking in the AP Poll.  The Mountaineers raced to a 4–0 record and to No. 9 in the AP Poll. In Week 5 against No. 10 Pitt , however, West Virginia fell victim to another memorable collapse in the Backyard Brawl. Trailing 31–9 in the 4th quarter, Pitt scored 22 unanswered points and kicked a game-tying field goal as time expired to force a 31–31 tie. The Mountaineers suffered another defeat the following week with a 12–10 home loss to Virginia Tech , followed by a 19–9 loss to No. 16 Penn State in State College . Despite those defeats, WVU finished the regular season at 8–2–1, a No. 17 ranking in the AP Poll, and a trip to the Gator Bowl to face No. 14 Clemson .  The Mountaineers lost 27–7 and finished the season at 8–3–1 with a No. 21 ranking in the final AP Poll. The 1990 season , West Virginia's final as an NCAA Division I-A Independent, coincided with a 4–7 finish.

West Virginia entered the 1991 season as new members of the Big East in what became a 20-year affiliation with the conference. After finishes of 6–5 in 1991 and 5–4–2 in 1992 , the Mountaineers returned to ranks of the college football elite in the 1993 season . For the second time in six seasons, West Virginia produced an undefeated, 11-win regular season in 1993.  The Mountaineers engineered several close victories, beginning with a 36–34 upset of No. 17 Louisville at home in Morgantown. In its final two regular season games, WVU twice erased 4th quarter deficits to defeat No. 4 Miami and No. 11 Boston College . Despite finishing the regular season undefeated and ranked No. 2 in the Coaches Poll and No. 3 in the AP Poll, West Virginia was not selected to play in the Orange Bowl for a possible national championship. The Bowl Coalition system, designed to place the top two ranked teams in a bowl to determine the National Champion, slotted the Mountaineers at No. 3 behind 11–1 Florida State . The Seminoles were selected to play No. 1 Nebraska in the Orange Bowl for the national championship, while West Virginia settled for a Sugar Bowl berth against SEC Champion Florida .  The Gators routed the Mountaineers 41–7, denying West Virginia its perfect season.  WVU finished the season at 11–1, ranked No. 6 in the Coaches Poll and No. 7 in the AP Poll.  Robert Walker amassed a then-school record 1,250 rushing yards, along with 11 touchdowns on the season.

The 1993 season was WVU's final season with double-digit victories during Nehlen's tenure as subsequent Mountaineer teams failed to recapture that level of success.  After posting a 7–6 record in 1994 and a 5–6 mark in 1995 , the 1996 Mountaineers showed promise of returning the program to national prominence.  West Virginia began the 1996 season with a 7–0 record, only to lose three of its final four regular season games en route to an 8–3 record and a 20–13 defeat in the Gator Bowl at the hands of No. 12 North Carolina to finish 8–4. The Mountaineers put together another strong start in 1997 , taking a 7–2 record into the final two weeks of the season.  Once again, the Mountaineers faltered as they lost 21–14 at Notre Dame and 41–38 in triple overtime to a 5–5 Pitt team to finish the regular season at 7–4.  The late season collapse culminated in another bowl game defeat, this time to Georgia Tech in the Carquest Bowl . Despite the disappointing conclusion to the season, quarterback Marc Bulger emerged as a capable leader throwing for 2,465 yards and 14 touchdowns. Running back Amos Zereoué shattered Robert Walker's rushing record with 1,589 yards, and his 18 rushing touchdowns are the second most in a single season at WVU.

The 1998 season brought high expectations for the Mountaineers, as WVU entered the season ranked No. 11 in the AP Poll. Despite dropping its opening game to No. 1 Ohio State , West Virginia rebounded to win its next four games and went on to finish the season with an 8–3 record and 5–2 mark in Big East conference play.  The Mountaineers failed to attain nine wins, however, as they lost their 8th consecutive bowl game in the Insight.com Bowl to Missouri . Bulger set two WVU records with 3,607 yards passing and 31 touchdown passes, while Zereoué amassed 1,462 yards rushing and 13 touchdowns in his final season as a Mountaineer. Receivers Shawn Foreman and David Saunders finished with eight touchdown receptions each. After a 4–7 finish in 1999 , Don Nehlen's final season with the Mountaineers in 2000 culminated in a 7–5 record with a victory in the Music City Bowl over Ole Miss , ending West Virginia's streak of futility in bowl games. Overall, Nehlen posted a 149–93–4 record during his tenure at West Virginia, making him both the longest-serving and most successful head coach in Mountaineer history. While his coaching tenure contained numerous successes, Nehlen's time at WVU also included its share of shortcomings as his Mountaineer teams often struggled against ranked opponents and in bowl games. However, as the man responsible for shaping the Mountaineer football program and bringing it to national relevancy in his 21 seasons in Morgantown, Nehlen was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 2005. Most importantly, his tenure laid the foundation for the program's most successful and prominent era.

After Nehlen's retirement, WVU named then- Clemson offensive coordinator and West Virginia native Rich Rodriguez as its first new head coach in 20 years. Rodriguez's tenure began ignominiously, as the 2001 edition of the Mountaineers finished 3–8, its worst record since 1978. The failures of 2001, however, set the stage for the emergence of the most successful era in Mountaineer football history. The 2002 season represented the biggest single-season turnaround in program history.  Despite a 5–3 record through the season's first eight games, the Mountaineers reeled off four consecutive victories, including upset road wins over then-ranked rivals Virginia Tech (No. 13) and Pitt (No. 17). West Virginia finished the regular season at 9–3 overall, with a 6–1 conference record for second place in the Big East, and a berth in the Continental Tire Bowl with Virginia .  Despite losing its bowl game, West Virginia finished with a 9–4 record and was ranked in both the final Coaches (No. 20) and AP (No. 25) polls for the first time since 1993.  The momentum generated from the 2002 campaign was short-lived as the Mountaineers stumbled to a 1–4 record early in the 2003 season . In similar fashion to the previous season, West Virginia rebounded and recorded seven wins in a row, including upsets of No. 3 Virginia Tech and No. 16 Pitt .  The Mountaineers ended the regular season at 8–4 with a 6–1 conference mark, earning them a share of their first Big East title since 1993.  West Virginia earned a trip to the Gator Bowl for a rematch with rival Maryland . The result for the Mountaineers was a near duplicate of their 34–7 defeat to the Terrapins earlier in the season, as they fell 41–7 and finished the season 8–5. In contrast to 2002 and 2003, the 2004 season may best be remembered for what the Mountaineers failed to accomplish.  West Virginia, ranked No. 10 in the AP Poll to begin the season, carried an 8–1 record through its first nine games. The Mountaineers collapsed in the final two games of the regular season, however, losing to No. 21 Boston College and to Pitt . West Virginia squandered its opportunity to win the Big East outright, leading to a four-way tie for first place and the BCS Fiesta Bowl nomination going to Pitt by tiebreaker.  The disappointing season drew to a close with 30–18 loss to Florida State in the Gator Bowl , giving WVU an 8–4 record.

The 2005 season was a noteworthy one for the Mountaineers.  After a 5–1 (albeit offensively sluggish) start to the season, the Mountaineers came alive in Week 7 against No. 19 Louisville . Quarterback Pat White and running back Steve Slaton helped to erase a 24–7 4th quarter deficit en route to a thrilling 46–44 triple overtime victory. From that point forward, the Mountaineers outscored their opponents 156–39 en route to a 10–1 finish and a 7–0 record in conference play for their second outright Big East championship. The Mountaineers also earned their first ever BCS bowl game berth, facing No. 8 Georgia in the Sugar Bowl .  West Virginia scored 21 points in the 1st quarter, holding on for a 38–35 upset victory. The Mountaineers finished the 2005 season with their third 11-win season and achieved rankings of No. 5 and No. 6 in the AP and Coaches Polls, respectively. The Mountaineers once again posted 11 wins in the 2006 season , narrowly missing out on another Big East championship after losses to Louisville and South Florida . West Virginia remained ranked in the top 15 in both polls throughout the season, earning another New Year's Day bowl game as they met Georgia Tech in the Gator Bowl .  The Mountaineers came away with another 38–35 victory, winning consecutive bowl games for the first time since the 1983 and 1984 seasons.  Additionally, center Dan Mozes and running back Steve Slaton earned Consensus All-American honors.  Slaton's 1,744 yards rushing set the WVU single-season rushing record.

The 2007 season may well be regarded as the most infamous season in West Virginia football history. The Mountaineers attained a preseason ranking of No. 3 and had national championship aspirations.  WVU raced to a 10–1 record, including a 66–21 victory over UConn to secure its fifth Big East title and its second BCS bowl appearance. The Mountaineers rose to as high as No. 2 in the AP Poll and No. 1 in the Coaches Poll, needing only a victory at home over a 4–7, 28-point underdog Pitt team in the 100th installment of the Backyard Brawl to secure its second ever National Championship Game appearance.  That victory did not come, as the Mountaineers suffered a devastating 13–9 defeat. The fallout of the Pitt defeat reached beyond national championship implications for the program, as it culminated in the departure of Rich Rodriguez to Michigan . Rodriguez left prior to West Virginia's meeting with No. 3 Oklahoma in the Fiesta Bowl . The Mountaineers rebounded, posting a 48–28 victory over the heavily favored Sooners.

"Leave no doubt tonight. Leave no...doubt...tonight. No doubt they shouldn’t have played the 'Old Gold and Blue.' Not. This. Night."

Long-time assistant coach Bill Stewart , named as interim head coach for the game, received a five-year contract to become West Virginia's 32nd head coach. The Mountaineers concluded the 2007 season with an 11–2 record and were ranked at No. 6 in both of the final AP and Coaches Polls. The Mountaineers transitioned into the Bill Stewart era in the 2008 season .  WVU amassed a 9–4 record and a second-place finish in the Big East, closing the season Meineke Car Care Bowl victory over North Carolina and a No. 23 ranking in the AP Poll. The bowl victory was West Virginia's fourth in a row, giving Pat White a postseason record of 4–0 as a starting quarterback. During Week 13 of the 2008 season, White set the NCAA rushing yardage record for quarterbacks with a 200-yard performance in a 35–21 win over Louisville .

The 2009 season culminated in another nine-win campaign and second-place finish in the Big East for the Mountaineers.  WVU ended its two-year losing streak in the Backyard Brawl with an upset victory over No. 8 Pitt .  West Virginia's season concluded with a loss in the Gator Bowl to Florida State in Bobby Bowden's final game as a head coach. The 2010 season brought the program its third consecutive nine-win season. Nonetheless, the season was ultimately a disappointment for the Mountaineers.  Despite assembling arguably the strongest defense in program history (surrendering only 176 total points, an average of 13.5 per game) and having a talented offense, West Virginia struggled with consistency all season. The Mountaineers lost to No. 15 LSU , Syracuse and UConn by a combined 14 points, while the Mountaineer defense did not surrender more than 23 points scored against in a single game throughout the season. WVU's loss to Connecticut in Week 9 came back to haunt the Mountaineers as they lost out on a BCS Bowl bid by virtue of a tiebreaker to the Huskies.

Prior to West Virginia's Champs Sports Bowl match up with North Carolina State , Dana Holgorsen was hired as the "coach-in-waiting," serving as offensive coordinator during the 2011 season and replacing Stewart as head coach in 2012. Luck didn't believe Stewart was capable of leading the Mountaineers to a national championship, and was also concerned about declining season ticket sales. The relationship between Stewart and Holgorsen imploded just months later. Colin Dunlap of KDKA-FM in Pittsburgh claimed that Stewart had asked him to dig up dirt on Holgorsen while Dunlap was a reporter at the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . While athletic director Luck was unable to substantiate the claims, he decided that the coach-in-waiting arrangement was untenable, leading to Stewart's resignation and Holgorsen becoming head coach.

The Mountaineers finished the 2011 regular season with a 9–3 record (5–2 in Big East play) and a share of its 7th Big East title. The Mountaineers were the only Big East team ranked in the final BCS standings (No. 23), earning the BCS bid by tiebreaker and an Orange Bowl berth against ACC champion No. 14 Clemson . In its first Orange Bowl appearance, the Mountaineers soundly defeated Clemson 70–33 and set an NCAA record for points scored in a bowl game. The Mountaineers finished the season at 10–3 and ranked No. 17 in the AP Poll and No. 18 in the Coaches Poll. From 2002 to 2011, the Mountaineer football program yielded its most prolific era to date, producing a 95–33 record. During that span WVU participated in ten bowl games, finished ranked in at least one of the AP or Coaches Polls on seven occasions, won six Big East Conference titles, and produced three BCS bowl game victories.

In the midst of continued college football conference realignment , WVU joined the Big 12 Conference as of July 1, 2012. Despite starting the 2012 season at 5–0 and climbing into the top 5 in the AP and Coaches Polls, WVU lost six of its final eight games en route to a 7–6 finish. The season culminated in a loss to rival Syracuse in the Pinstripe Bowl . The 2013 season brought WVU's first losing campaign since 2001.  After a 4–5 start and an opportunity to secure bowl eligibility with two victories, WVU faltered in its final three games to finish 4–8. The Mountaineers rebounded in the 2014 season , posting a 7–6 record against a schedule featuring five opponents ranked in the top 15. WVU raced to a 6–2 start, only to lose four of its final five games. The Mountaineers returned to a bowl game in 2014, losing in the Liberty Bowl . WVU returned to the eight-win plateau in 2015 season , posting a 7–5 record during the regular season and winning the Cactus Bowl . In the 2016 season , the Mountaineers finished in second place in the Big 12 and finished the season with a 10–3 record, the ninth season in the program's history with at least ten victories. The season culminated in a loss to Miami in the Russell Athletic Bowl . Prior to the conclusion of the regular season, Holgorsen and WVU agreed to a five-year contract extension. In 2017 , WVU finished 7–6. The season concluded with a loss in the Heart of Dallas Bowl . The Mountaineers started the season 7–3, only to lose their final three games after a season-ending hand injury to quarterback Will Grier . The 2018 season saw the Mountaineers start with an 8–1 record, earning top 10 rankings in the polls and in the College Football Playoff . WVU faltered in its final two regular season games, however, and failed to earn a berth in the Big 12 Championship Game . WVU finished 8–4 with a loss in the Camping World Bowl . Soon thereafter, Dana Holgorsen left the program to take the head coaching position at Houston .

On January 5, 2019, Troy head coach Neal Brown was named the 34th head coach of the program. Brown brought with him an exciting, up-tempo- pass-oriented offense known as the Air raid . WVU finished the 2019 season with a 5–7 record, failing to qualify for a bowl game for the first time since 2013. The Mountaineers rebounded in 2020 , posting 6–4 record culminating in a Liberty Bowl victory against Army in their first meeting since the 1961 season .

In 2021 , the Mountaineers were looking for improvement, but were met with more of the same, finishing with a 6–6 record through the regular season. They began the season with a rivalry loss to Maryland , and then defeated LIU and won back the Black Diamond Trophy from Virginia Tech. The team finished the season in the Guaranteed Rate Bowl at Chase Field in Phoenix, resulting in an 18–6 loss to the Minnesota Golden Gophers . The Mountaineer's 2022 season was looked at with much excitement after the team was able to successfully sign former five-star quarterback JT Daniels in the offseason, and the anticipation of the renewal of the Backyard Brawl for the first time since 2011. The season kicked off with the Mountaineers traveling to Pittsburgh to play the Panthers at Acrisure Stadium . However, the Mountaineers failed to start the season with a win, losing the game 38–31. A few weeks later, after losing to Kansas at home in overtime and defeating Towson, the team successfully defended the Black Diamond Trophy at Virginia Tech, winning 33–10. The Mountaineers went on to lose four out of the five conference games. The season ended with optimism after Sophomore Backup-QB Garrett Greene defeated the Oklahoma Sooners 23–20 for the first time since entering the  Big 12 Conference. After this game, Greene was named the Mountaineer's starter. The Mountaineers finished the season 5–7 (3–6 conference), failing to qualify for a bowl game for the 2nd time in the Neal Brown Era.

The 2023 season started with the renewal of another West Virginia rival. The team was set to play the Penn State Nittany Lions for the first time since 1992. After the Mountaineers lost the season opener 38–15, the team rallied to win four games in a row, including a 17–6 win against Pitt at home. After dropping the next two games to Houston and Oklahoma State, they were able to string together four wins in the last five games to give them a regular season record of 8–4, the best of Neal Brown's WVU tenure. They went on to defeat the North Carolina Tar Heels in the 2023 Duke's Mayo Bowl by a score of 30–10. However, the success of the 2023 season was unable to continue through the 2024 season. The Mountaineers dropped to a 1–2 record in non-conference play with losses to rivals Penn State and Pitt. Conference play wasn't a success either, and the team finished the season with a 6–6 record. On December 1, 2024, the day after losing to Texas Tech in the regular season finale 52–15, West Virginia University fired Neal Brown. He went 37–35 during his tenure in Morgantown. Offensive coordinator Chad Scott took over as interim head coach until the conclusion of the Frisco Bowl against the Memphis Tigers , which the Mountaineers would go on to lose by a score of 37–42.

On December 11, 2024, it was reported that Rodriguez and West Virginia University had agreed in principle that he would become the next head football coach of the West Virginia Mountaineers with contract terms and language yet to be finalized. On December 12, 2024, he was officially named the 36th head football coach in the history of the West Virginia Mountaineers.

West Virginia has won or shared a conference championship on 15 occasions, ten outright and five shared, including eight Southern Conference (SoCon) titles and seven Big East Conference titles.

† Co-champion

The ECAC Lambert-Meadowlands Trophy is an annual award given to the best team in the Eastern Region of FBS -level college football. West Virginia has received the award as Eastern Champion on four occasions. [ citation needed ]

West Virginia has participated in 41 bowl games throughout its history, compiling a 17–24 record through the 2024 season. The Mountaineers endured a dubious string of post-season futility from 1987 to 2004 , losing 11 of 12 bowl games including eight consecutive losses between 1987 and 1998 . However, West Virginia won four straight bowl games from 2005 to 2008 with Pat White , who became the first ever quarterback to win all four bowl games as a starter in Division I college football. These are West Virginia's last ten bowl games.

The West Virginia Mountaineers have had 34 head coaches throughout the program's history. With 149 victories, Don Nehlen is first overall in the program's history, followed by Dana Holgorsen and Rich Rodriguez tied with 61 each.

West Virginia has finished a season ranked in at least one of the Associated Press (AP) or Coaches polls on 22 occasions.  The Mountaineers have finished ranked amongst the top 10 in college football on five occasions. West Virginia attained its highest-ever ranking in the polls during week 14 of the 2007 season , when they were ranked No. 1 in the Coaches Poll and No. 2 in the AP Poll.

The Mountaineers have concluded the regular season ranked in the final rankings of the College Football Playoff (CFP) on two occasions. West Virginia finished the regular season ranked seven times in the final rankings of the Bowl Championship Series (BCS) , a predecessor to the CFP. The Bowl Coalition , a predecessor to the CFP and BCS systems, ranked WVU 3rd in its final standings at the conclusion of the 1993 regular season . As of the end of the 2020 season, the Mountaineers were 49–122–2 against opponents ranked in the AP Poll.

Since 1891, the Mountaineers have played their home games in Morgantown, West Virginia along with neutral-site games at numerous locations throughout West Virginia , most notably in Charleston , Clarksburg , Fairmont , Parkersburg and Wheeling . The construction of Old Mountaineer Field in 1924 gave WVU its first permanent home facility.  Located next to Woodburn Hall in what is now considered the Downtown portion of the WVU campus, the first incarnation of Mountaineer Field consisted of a horseshoe-type seating arrangement. The stadium eventually grew in capacity to its peak of 38,000 by 1979. The physical location of the stadium made it impossible for further expansion to take place, however, and led to the relocation of the football program to the new Mountaineer Field in 1980. The old stadium was razed in 1987. At the southwest corner where the stadium once stood, there is a horseshoe-shaped monument commemorating the stadium.  From 1924 to 1979 the Mountaineers played 267 games at Old Mountaineer Field, compiling a 171–82–14 record.

The Mountaineers have played their home games at the second incarnation of Mountaineer Field since 1980.  The bowl-shaped stadium is located on the Evansdale section of the WVU campus .  Originally constructed with an east–west configuration of the seating areas and a capacity of 50,000, subsequent seating additions at the north and south ends of the facility increased the capacity to over 63,000 by 1986 through the 2003 season. Suites were first introduced to Mountaineer Field in 1994, with 12 suites being constructed in the first row of the press box on the stadium's west end. General admission seating in the north end zone was replaced with 18 suites in 2004 to create the "Touchdown Terrace" section, while four additional suites were added in the south end zone in 2007. The construction of Touchdown Terrace in 2004 brought the stadium's capacity to 60,000.

As of November 29, 2003, the stadium has been named "Milan Puskar Stadium" in honor of Milan Puskar , the founder of Morgantown-based Mylan Pharmaceuticals , in recognition of his $20 million donation to the university.

Due to Mountaineer Field's capacity and the relatively smaller populations of West Virginia's largest cities, it has been suggested that Morgantown becomes the largest "city" in the state on game days due to the influx of spectators at the stadium. Crowds at Mountaineer Field have earned the reputation of being loud and boisterous, creating a hostile atmosphere for opposing teams.

The largest crowd to ever attend a game at the stadium was 70,222, set on November 20, 1993, when West Virginia defeated #4 Miami 17–14.

Also constructed in 1980 was the "Facilities Building" (now the Milan Puskar Center) to house the program's football offices. Originally located south of Mountaineer Field, in 1985 the facility was connected to the stadium when an 11,000-seat expansion enclosed the South end zone bowl. The 39,000-square-foot facility houses the team's locker room and training facilities, including a 23,000-square-foot weight training facility on the first floor of the complex.  The second floor of the Puskar Center houses the offensive and defensive wings for the coaching staffs, the team meeting room, player position rooms, the football staff conference room, and the Reynolds Family Academic Performance Center. Also located on the second floor of the Puskar Center is the Donald J. Brohard Hall of Traditions. Made possible through a gift by WVU alumnus and Datatel, Inc. founder Ken Kendrick , the Hall of Traditions opened in 2006 to honor the history of the WVU football program. The Hall of Traditions houses interactive displays, videos, photos, records and information on the program. The Hall is open to the public on weekdays throughout the year.

The Puskar Center underwent significant renovations in 2012 and 2013, aimed specifically at improving the weight room, the aesthetics of the facility's interior, lounge space for the football players and upgrading the coaches' meeting areas. Further renovation of the Puskar Center in 2015 culminated with the construction of a new team meeting room for the players and coaches. 
The structure has 162 theater-style chairs to seat an entire football team, as well as support staff and personnel. The room is also utilized for the head coach's weekly news conferences during the season, as well as media interviews with players and other coaches.

Further renovations to the Puskar Center are planned for the future as part of WVU's master plan for athletic facilities.

The Mountaineers utilize two facilities for indoor and outdoor football practices, the Caperton Indoor Practice Facility and the Steve Antoline Family Football Practice Field.

The Caperton facility opened in August 1998. The indoor space is equipped with a 90-yard FieldTurf playing surface with seven yards of safety zone surrounding the entire field. Total length from wall to wall is 105 yards, with more than 75,000 square feet of practice room. Located behind the Caperton facility is the Steve Antoline Family Practice Field, a FieldTurf facility previously consisting of two grass fields. The Antoline facility consists of a full-length 120-yard field along with an adjacent 60-yard field.

The theme song of West Virginia University, John Denver's " Take Me Home, Country Roads " has been performed at every home football game pregame show since 1972. In 1980, John Denver performed his hit song during pregame festivities to a sold-out crowd at Mountaineer Field. His performance marked the dedication of the second incarnation of Mountaineer Field and the first game for head coach Don Nehlen. After every home win, WVU players and fans link arm-in-arm and sing along to a recording of the song.

Performed by the Pride of West Virginia marching band, the pregame show includes such traditions as the 220-beat per minute run-on introductory drum cadence, the formation of the "Flying WV" logo to the tune of "Fight Mountaineers," and the forming of the state of West Virginia while playing the university fight song " Hail, West Virginia ." The band also performs "Take Me Home, Country Roads" as well as Aaron Copland's " Simple Gifts ." The fans participate in several cheers during the pregame show, notably chanting "W-V-U" to the roll of the band's drum line prior to the playing of "Fight Mountaineers," as well as chanting "Let's Go Mountaineers" in between playings of "Hail, West Virginia."

WVU students encompassing the "Mountaineer Maniacs" section and fans alike participate in several chants during WVU home games. The "Let's Go...Mountaineers" chant, with the east end of the stadium shouting "Let's Go..." and the west end responding with "Mountaineers," is the most popular amongst those in attendance. Since the mid-2000s, West Virginia fans also participate in the "1st Down" and "3rd Down" cheers. The "1st Down" cheer was originated by multi-year season ticket holders Harold Tate and family in section 105 around the 1985 to 1988 seasons. The "1st Down" cheer can be heard at both home and away games prior to the announcement of a Mountaineer first down. Mountaineer fans raise their hands and hold a cheer of "OH!" in unison until the first down call is made by the public address announcer. Following the call, the fans pump their arms up and down three times to a chant of "W-V-U," clap and then signal to the end zone chanting "first down!" The "3rd Down" cheer is similar, with Mountaineer fans raising their arms and waving three fingers upon the announcement of "third down" by the public address.

WVU incorporated the Mountaineers nickname in 1905 after the coining of West Virginia's state motto, "Mountaineers are Always Free." Prior to 1905, the team was referred to as the "Snakes." The Mountaineer mascot first appeared at WVU sporting events during the 1934–35 school year and has been a fixture ever since. The Mountaineer is selected each year by the Mountain Honorary, composed of members of West Virginia University's senior class. The Mountaineer's costume is tailored to fit each winner, and male Mountaineers customarily grow beards during their tenure to go along with the coonskin cap and rifle, although the beard is not a requirement for the mascot position. The mascot is modeled after the Mountaineer bronze statue located in front of the Mountainlair student union building on the WVU campus. During football games, the Mountaineer mascot will fire his musket upon the team's entrance prior to kickoff, at the conclusion of each quarter and following every score.

Introduced by head coach Rich Rodriguez during the 2007 season, the "Gold Rush" is an ongoing tradition with WVU fans at Mountaineer Field. Partially inspired by the Penn State " White Out " tradition, as well as the "black-out" effect created by Louisville Cardinals fans dressed in black during their game against WVU in 2006, Rodriguez encouraged Mountaineer fans to dress entirely in gold for the rematch between WVU and Louisville in 2007. WVU's home schedule has featured a Gold Rush home game in each of its subsequent seasons. Since 2008, West Virginia University has worked in conjunction with the United Way to promote the event, selling gold T-shirts to fans with the proceeds benefiting the WVU United Way Campaign.

In contrast, WVU designates one home game per season as a "True Blue" game where the fans in attendance are encouraged to wear blue throughout the stadium. The Mountaineer players wear their all-blue uniform sets for these particular games.

The fan tradition of "Stripe the Stadium" has been in place since the Mountaineers joined the Big 12 Conference in 2012. Fans are encouraged to wear a designated color for their respective seating section. Fans in even sections of the stadium and students in the lower section of the student section are asked to wear blue. Fans in odd sections and students in the upper section of the student section are asked to wear gold. The result is the stadium appearing to be "striped" in blue and gold".

Instituted during the 2011 season by head coach Dana Holgorsen, the Mountaineer Mantrip is a part of West Virginia's gameday traditions and a recognition of the significance of West Virginia's coal industry . The event is named for the shuttle that transports coalminers into and out of an underground mine at the start and end of their shift and takes place at every home game.

The walk begins when the team is dropped off at the corner of the WVU Medical Center and Don Nehlen Drive prior to game time. They are accompanied by the Mountaineer mascot, the Pride of West Virginia Marching Band, and the Mountaineer cheerleaders. WVU students and fans line the path to create a tunnel-like effect for the passing team members. When the team reaches the east end of Mountaineer Field, they stop to rub a 350-pound mounted chunk of coal donated by Alpha Natural Resources from the Upper Big Branch coal mine .

A new feature at the completion of the Mantrip was introduced during the 2018 season. After players and coaches have reached Mountaineer Field and touched the mounted piece of coal, they turn and wave toward the parents and patients inside WVU Medicine Children's Hospital adjacent to Mountaineer Field. Dana Holgorsen added this portion of the festivity having drawn inspiration from the Kinnick Stadium "Wave" .

Beginning in 1970, the Mountaineers donned the program's first official logo—the WVU "state outline"—on their helmets through the 1979 season and have reintroduced the logo as part of a "throwback" helmet since 2013. West Virginia used a white helmet with the state outline logo from 1970 to 1972, a gold helmet with the same logo from 1973 to 1978, and reverted to the white helmet and state outline logo in 1979 and again in 2013.

The "Flying WV" is the trademark logo for West Virginia Mountaineer football, adorning the team's helmet and uniform. It debuted in 1980 along with the current gold and blue color scheme as a part of a football uniform redesign by head coach Don Nehlen , and has since become one of the most widely recognized logos in collegiate athletics. In adopting the Flying WV logo on the team's helmets, Nehlen wanted to create a distinct image for the football program that could be easily identified. When Nehlen began his tenure as head coach in 1980, he initially had difficulty in distinguishing between WVU and its opponents while watching game film. The logo itself was created by sports artist John Martin, brother of then-Athletic Director Dick Martin. John Martin's primary inspiration for the logo was the depiction of mountains created with the combination of the state initials 'W' and 'V'. The surge in the logo's popularity led to its adoption as the official logo of West Virginia University in 1985.

Since 1980, West Virginia's standard uniform has consisted of a dark blue jersey (home) or a white jersey (away) with gold pants and a dark blue helmet adorned by the gold "Flying WV" logo on both sides. West Virginia's uniform scheme has also included a gold helmet, white helmet, gold jersey, dark blue pants, and white pants at various stages throughout its history.  WVU also added a gray uniform and helmet combination to its rotation for the 2012 season .

The Mountaineers wore a Nike Pro Combat uniform or the 2010 season edition of the Backyard Brawl . The uniform was specifically designed to pay tribute to West Virginia's coal mining industry. The jersey and pants consisted of a shade of white accented by a layer of coal dust, along with accents of university gold that referenced canaries utilized in coal mining. The helmet also implemented the coal dust accent, along with a yellow line down the center designed to embody the beam of light emitted by a miner's headlamp. West Virginia also donned the Pro Combat uniforms later that season for the Champs Sports Bowl .

WVU introduced new uniforms for the 2013 season . The helmets, jerseys, and pants featured blue, gold, and white primary color sets, creating 27 different possible uniform combinations. The reintroduction of the gold and white helmets to the uniform scheme marked the first time each have been used since the late 1970s. All of the helmets featured a matte, non-glossy paint finish and the "Flying WV" logo adorned on each side.  WVU introduced a white "throwback" helmet during the 2013 season, utilizing the 1970s "state outline" logo. The West Virginia state motto, Montani Semper Liberi , (“Mountaineers are Always Free”), was stitched inside the back collar of all three jerseys. A canary image was stitched inside the front collar, representative of West Virginia's coal mining heritage for their use in testing toxicity levels in the mines. The jerseys had a unique number style exclusive to WVU, featuring sharp points and edges inspired by a miner's pickaxe.

As of the 2019 season and as part of a larger re-branding of all WVU sports teams, the Mountaineers incorporated new Nike Vapor Untouchable football uniforms. The all-gray alternate uniform also returned to the rotation. West Virginia debuted "Country Roads" uniforms on September 1, 2022, against longtime rival Pitt . The uniforms are inspired by West Virginia's roadways, with interstate maps on the shoulders and yellow striping that resembles center line markings on the helmet.

The football rivalry between West Virginia University and the Cincinnati Bearcats is a regional and conference-driven series that has seen several memorable moments over the decades. The two programs first met in 1921 and played occasionally throughout much of the 20th century, but the rivalry truly gained significance when Cincinnati joined the Big East Conference in 2005. From 2005 to 2011, they faced each other annually, often with conference title implications. WVU dominated the early Big East-era meetings, including a 38–0 shutout in 2005, but Cincinnati turned the tide in 2008 with a 26–23 overtime win. The most notable game came in 2009 when undefeated, fifth-ranked Cincinnati edged WVU 24–21 on their way to a Big East championship and BCS berth. The annual series paused after WVU left for the Big 12 Conference in 2012, while Cincinnati joined the American Athletic Conference . The rivalry was renewed in 2023 when Cincinnati joined the Big 12. Since its renewal, WVU has won both the 2023 and 2024 matchups. The Mountaineers currently lead the series all-time with a 18–3–1 record.

West Virginia played in-state opponent Marshall in the annual Friends of Coal Bowl until 2012. Marshall and WVU first played in 1911, but it wasn't until 2006 before the two schools from the "Mountain State" faced off annually for the Governor's Cup. Some [ who? ] believe the rivalry began due to political pressure from the state government. The two last played in 2012, and there are no immediate plans to renew the rivalry. West Virginia holds a 12–0 lead in the series as of 2012. West Virginia has won all 12 meetings against Marshall.

The Mountaineers and Maryland Terrapins have met on a semi-annual basis since 1919, recently rekindling a cross-border rivalry that was once the longest continuous non-conference series for these geographical neighbors. The Mountaineers lead the series 28–23–2 through the 2021 season.

The series between West Virginia and Penn State has been historically one-sided. The teams met annually from 1947 to 1992. From 1959 to 1983, Penn State had won 25 consecutive meetings between the two. The series ended in 1992 with Penn State commencing Big Ten Conference play in 1993. On September 19, 2013, the schools announced that they would renew the series with two games in 2023 and 2024. Penn State leads the series 48–9–2 through the 2017 season.

In terms of competitiveness, intensity and longevity, the Backyard Brawl with the Pittsburgh Panthers is West Virginia's most fierce and storied rivalry. Separated by only 70 miles, the two universities have competed on a mostly annual basis since 1895 (beginning in 1920 and resuming again in 1943 after World War II ). Although Pitt holds a 63–41–3 series lead, more than half of its victories in the Backyard Brawl came prior to 1952 when the Panthers dominated the series 34–9–1. The Mountaineers hold a 26–22–2 edge over the Panthers since 1962 when the series began to interchange annually between Morgantown and Pittsburgh . West Virginia has also won seven of the last ten meetings. After being put on hiatus following the 2011 season due to conference realignment, the series was renewed with four games running from 2022 to 2025 and 2029–2032.

In the first game of the restored Brawl, the Mountaineers lost to the Pittsburgh Panthers by a final score of 38 to 31. The 2024 version of the Brawl was held on Saturday, September 24, 2024, and was won by Pittsburgh with a final score of 38–34. The most recent Brawl occurred on Sept 13, 2025 a significant date calling back to an upset victory by Pittsburgh in the 2007 contest where an unranked Pitt team defeated a hopeful National Championship bound NO. 2 ranked WVU team 13–9. In the coaching return of Rich Rodriguez to the WVU program beginning the 2025 season, the Mountaineers gained some redemption in the rivalry with a win in the 2025 contest by a score of 31–24 in a thrilling overtime game. On September 12, 2025, it was announced both schools had agreed to an extension of the Backyard Brawl beginning in the 2029 season going through the 2036 campaign.

West Virginia also enjoyed a long-standing rivalry with the Syracuse Orange . The schools competed annually from 1955 to 2012, with the 1993 addition of the Ben Schwartzwalder Trophy being awarded to the victor. The significance of the trophy resides in the fact that Ben Schwartzwalder was a West Virginia native, former WVU player, and head coach at Syracuse. While Syracuse holds a 34–27 lead in the series, WVU won eight of the last ten games between the schools. Much like the status of the Backyard Brawl, Syracuse's departure from the Big East for the Atlantic Coast Conference and WVU's joining of the Big 12 Conference casts doubt over the future of the series.

The Mountaineers also enjoy a fierce rivalry with their Appalachia counterparts, the Virginia Tech Hokies . The schools once competed on an annual basis from 1973 to 2005, doing so as Big East Conference rivals starting in 1991. Beginning in 1997, West Virginia and Virginia Tech competed for the Black Diamond Trophy, symbolizing the Appalachian region's rich coal heritage. While West Virginia held a 28–22–1 advantage in the series, Virginia Tech won nine of the last 12 meetings between the schools. Since the Hokies departed the Big East for the ACC in 2004 and ended the series in 2006, the rivalry has been dormant.  The rivalry was renewed with a neutral-site game in 2017, then was played in Morgantown in 2021 and was played in Blacksburg in the 2022 season. West Virginia leads the series with Virginia Tech 30–23–1 through the 2022 season.

West Virginia has produced seven Heisman Trophy candidates. Major Harris is the only Mountaineer to be considered as a finalist for the award, garnering consideration in the 1988 and 1989 seasons.

A total of 20 Mountaineer players and coaches have been finalists for numerous college football awards . Don Nehlen and Calvin Magee have won awards as coaches, while Dan Mozes , Pat White , and Tavon Austin have earned awards as players.

Forty-Seven Mountaineers have been recognized as First-Team All-Americans by various media selectors. Among those selections, 14 have achieved Consensus All-American status.  Of those consensus All-Americans, four were unanimous selections.

During WVU's 18-season tenure in the Southern Conference , a total of seven Mountaineers were recognized with superlative conference honors. Art Lewis received Coach of the Year distinction on consecutive occasions (1953 & 1954) while Bruce Bosley was named the SoCon Player of the Year and Jacobs Blocking Award winner in 1955. During WVU's 21 seasons in the Big East , a total of 12 Mountaineers were recognized with superlative conference honors . Don Nehlen (1993) and Rich Rodriguez (2003) were unanimous selections for Big East Coach of the Year, while Todd Sauerbrun was the unanimous selection for Big East Special Teams Player of the Year in 1994 and Amos Zereoué was the unanimous selection for Big East Rookie of the Year in 1996. Tavon Austin was WVU's first Big 12 Conference award recipient, garnering Co-Special Teams Player of the Year honors in 2012.

From 1950 to 1967, West Virginia competed in the Southern Conference . During their 18 seasons in the SoCon, a total of 35 Mountaineers were recognized as First-Team All-Southern Conference selections.

The Mountaineers competed in the Big East Conference from 1991 to 2011. During their 21 seasons in the Big East, a total of 61 Mountaineers were recognized as First-Team All-Big East selections. Among those players, Tavon Austin (as a Return Specialist, 2011), Noel Devine , Pat White (2007), Eric Wicks (2006), Adam "Pac-Man" Jones (as a Cornerback, 2004), Grant Wiley (2003), Barrett Green , Canute Curtis , Aaron Beasley (1995), Todd Sauerbrun (1994) and Adrian Murrell (1992) were unanimous selections by the conference.

Since joining the Big 12 Conference in 2012, 24 Mountaineers have been recognized as First-Team All-Big 12 selections.

West Virginia has retired six jersey numbers. It is the highest possible accolade to achieve within the Mountaineer football program.

Introduced in 2016, the West Virginia University Mountaineer Legends Society is the second level of recognition for the WVU football program. The Legends Society program replaced the retirement of a jersey number, which had previously served as the second form of recognition. Jersey number retirement remains the highest attainable honor for the WVU football program.

Honors include addition into the team's Legends Park outside of Mountaineer Field and in graphics on column wraps around the stadium's concourse in a "ring of honor" configuration.

To be eligible, a coach, player or administrator must meet the following criteria:

The following individuals have been inducted into the Mountaineer Legends Society for their contributions to the Mountaineer football program:

The West Virginia University Sports Hall of Fame is the first level of recognition for past members of the Mountaineer football program.  Former athletes, coaches and administrators are eligible for selection 10 years following their association with WVU athletics. It is the first step of recognition for former players, coaches and administrators. The following individuals have been inducted into the WVU Sports Hall of Fame for their contributions to the Mountaineer football program:

The National Football Foundation , overseer of the College Football Hall of Fame , recognizes eleven individuals as WVU inductees. Conversely, the Mountaineer football program recognizes 14 individuals as inductees.

† – Recognition by the National Football Foundation and WVU

‡ – Recognition by WVU

Three Mountaineers hold the distinguished title of Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees.

Joe Stydahar , an offensive tackle , was inducted in 1967. Despite Stydahar's collegiate career, Chicago Bears owner/coach George Halas took a chance in selecting the little-known tackle with the Bears' first ever draft selection in the 1936 NFL draft . Halas's gamble paid off as "Jumbo Joe" produced a great playing career with the Bears, earning four NFL All-Star selections, six All-Pro selections, three NFL championships, and an induction into the NFL's All-Decade Team for the 1930s .  Stydahar also served as head coach of the Los Angeles Rams and the Chicago Cardinals , winning the 1951 NFL Championship with the Rams.  During his Hall of Fame enshrinement speech, Stydahar thanked his family and friends from his "dear state, West Virginia."

Sam Huff , a linebacker , was inducted in 1982. Originally a third round selection by the New York Giants in the 1956 NFL draft , Huff played for the Giants from 1956 to 1963 and later for the Washington Redskins from 1964 to 1969. Huff's football career, let alone his future in the NFL , almost never came to pass, however. When Huff was a junior in high school, WVU head coach Art Lewis came to his town to look at another prospect and recruited Huff instead. At the end of Huff's collegiate career Giants scout Al DeRogatis came to Morgantown to look at All-American guard Bruce Bosley . DeRogatis instead discovered Huff, proclaiming that "there's another guard here who will be even greater. His name is Sam Huff." Huff became a five-time Pro Bowl selection, a four-time First-Team All-Pro selection, an inductee in the NFL 1950s All-Decade Team , and was named as one of the 70 Greatest Redskins of all time. Huff was also recognized as the NFL's Top Linebacker in 1959.

Chuck Howley , a linebacker, was inducted in 2023. Selected by the Chicago Bears seventh overall in the 1958 NFL draft , he played for the Bears from 1958 to 1959, before briefly retiring from football, then returning to play for the Dallas Cowboys and played the remainder of his career for them. An original member of the Doomsday Defense , Howley received six Pro Bowl and five first-team All-Pro selections with the Cowboys, while appearing in two consecutive Super Bowls and winning Super Bowl VI . Howley was also named the MVP of Super Bowl V and is the only player on a losing team to receive the award.

WVU has produced a total of 198 NFL Draft selections.

Of those players selected in the draft, 12 Mountaineers have been selected in the first round.

Among the numerous Mountaineers that have participated in the NFL, a total of 32 have received all-star or Pro Bowl recognition.

Announced schedules as of September 12, 2025.

Rock music is a genre of popular music that originated in the United States as " rock and roll " in the late 1940s and early 1950s, developing into a range of styles from the late 50s to mid-1960s, primarily in the United States and United Kingdom. It has its roots beginning as classic rock and roll, a style that drew from the African-American musical genres of blues and rhythm and blues , as well as from country music . Rock also drew strongly from genres such as electric blues and folk , and incorporated influences from jazz and other styles. Rock is typically centered on the electric guitar , usually as part of a rock group with an electric bass guitar , drums , and one or more singers.

Usually, rock is song-based music with a 4 4 time signature and using a verse–chorus form ; however, the genre has become extremely diverse. Like pop music , lyrics often stress romantic love but also address a wide variety of other themes that are frequently social or political. Rock was the most popular genre of music in the U.S. and much of the western world from the 1960s up to the 2010s.

Rock musicians in the mid-1960s began to advance the album ahead of the single as the dominant form of recorded music expression and consumption, with the Beatles at the forefront of this development. Their contributions lent the genre a cultural legitimacy in the mainstream and initiated a rock-informed album era in the music industry for the next several decades. By the late 1960s " classic rock " period, a few distinct rock music subgenres had emerged, including hybrids like blues rock , folk rock , country rock , southern rock , raga rock , and jazz rock , which contributed to the development of psychedelic rock , influenced by the countercultural psychedelic and hippie scene . New genres that emerged included progressive rock , which extended artistic elements, heavy metal , which emphasized an aggressive thick sound, and glam rock , which highlighted showmanship and visual style. In the second half of the 1970s, punk rock reacted by producing stripped-down, energetic social and political critiques. Punk was an influence in the 1980s on new wave , post-punk and eventually alternative rock .

From the 1990s, alternative rock began to dominate rock music and break into the mainstream in the form of grunge , Britpop , and indie rock . Further subgenres have since emerged, including pop-punk , electronic rock , rap rock , and rap metal . Some movements were conscious attempts to revisit rock's history, including the garage rock and post-punk revival in the 2000s. Since the 2010s, rock has lost its position as the pre-eminent popular music genre in world culture, but remains commercially successful. The increased influence of hip-hop and electronic dance music can be seen in rock music, notably in the techno-pop scene of the early 2010s and the pop-punk-hip-hop revival of the 2020s.

Rock has also embodied and served as the vehicle for cultural and social movements, leading to major subcultures, including the greasers in the U.S. during the 1950s to mid 1960s, with also the teddy boys and rockers in the U.K., the hippie movement and the wider western counterculture movement that spread out from San Francisco in the U.S. in the 1960s, the latter of which continues to this day. Similarly, 1970s punk culture spawned the goth , punk, and emo subcultures. Inheriting the folk tradition of the protest song , rock music has been associated with political activism , as well as changes in social attitudes to race, sex, and drug use, and is often seen as an expression of youth revolt against adult conformity . At the same time, it has been commercially highly successful, leading to accusations of selling out .

The sound of rock is traditionally centered on the amplified electric guitar, which emerged in its modern form in the 1950s with the popularity of rock and roll. It was also greatly influenced by the sounds of electric blues guitarists. The sound of an electric guitar in rock music is typically supported by an electric bass guitar, which pioneered jazz music in the same era, and by percussion produced from a drum kit that combines drums and cymbals. This trio of instruments has often been complemented by the inclusion of other instruments, particularly keyboards such as the piano, the Hammond organ , and the synthesizer. The basic rock instrumentation was derived from the basic electric blues band instrumentation (prominent lead guitar, second chordal instrument, bass, and drums). A group of musicians performing rock music is termed as a rock band or a rock group. It typically consists of between three (the power trio ) and five members. Classically, a rock band takes the form of a quartet whose members cover one or more roles, including vocalist, lead guitarist, rhythm guitarist, bass guitarist, drummer, and often keyboard player or another instrumentalist.

Rock music is traditionally built on a foundation of simple syncopated rhythms in a 4 4 meter , with a repetitive snare drum back beat on beats two and four. Melodies often originate from older musical modes such as the Dorian and Mixolydian , as well as the major and minor scales. Harmonies range from the common triad to parallel perfect fourths and fifths and dissonant harmonic progressions. Since the late 1950s, and particularly from the mid-1960s onwards, rock music often used the verse–refrain structure derived from blues and folk music, but there has been considerable variation from this model. Critics have stressed the eclecticism and stylistic diversity of rock. Because of its complex history and its tendency to borrow from other musical and cultural forms, it has been argued that "it is impossible to bind rock music to a rigidly delineated musical definition." In 1981, music journalist Robert Christgau said, "the best rock jolts folk-art virtues—directness, utility, natural audience—into the present with shots of modern technology".

Rock and roll was conceived as an outlet for adolescent yearnings ... To make rock and roll is also an ideal way to explore intersections of sex, love, violence, and fun, to broadcast the delights and limitations of the regional , and to deal with the depredations and benefits of mass culture itself.

Unlike many earlier styles of popular music, rock lyrics have dealt with a wide range of themes, including romantic love, sex, rebellion against the establishment , social concerns, and life styles. These themes were inherited from a variety of sources such as the Tin Pan Alley pop tradition, folk music , and rhythm and blues . Christgau characterizes rock lyrics as a "cool medium" with simple diction and repeated refrains, and asserts that rock's primary "function" "pertains to music, or, more generally, noise ." The predominance of white, male, and often middle class musicians in rock music has often been noted, and rock has been seen as an appropriation of Black musical forms for a young, white and largely male audience. As a result, it has also been seen to articulate the concerns of this group in both style and lyrics. Christgau, writing in 1972, said in spite of some exceptions, "rock and roll usually implies an identification of male sexuality and aggression".

Since the term "rock" started being used in preference to "rock and roll" from the late 1960s, it has usually been contrasted with pop music, with which it has shared many characteristics.  However, rock is often distanced from pop: the former has an emphasis on musicianship, live performance, and a focus on serious and progressive themes as part of an ideology of authenticity that is frequently combined with an awareness of the genre's history and development. According to Simon Frith , rock was "something more than pop, something more than rock and roll" and "rock musicians combined an emphasis on skill and technique with the romantic concept of art as artistic expression, original and sincere".

In the new millennium, the term rock has occasionally been used as a blanket term including forms like pop music, reggae music , soul music , and even hip-hop , which it has been influenced with but often contrasted through much of the latter's history. Christgau has used the term broadly to refer to popular and semipopular music that caters to his sensibility as "a rock-and-roller", including a fondness for a good beat, a meaningful lyric with some wit, and the theme of youth, which holds an "eternal attraction" so objective "that all youth music partakes of sociology and the field report ."

The foundations of rock music are in rock and roll, which originated in the United States during the late 1940s and early 1950s; the genre spread to much of the rest of the world. Its origins lay in a melding of various black musical genres of the time, including rhythm and blues and gospel music , with country and western .

Debate surrounds the many recordings which have been suggested as "the first rock and roll record ". Contenders include " Strange Things Happening Every Day " by Sister Rosetta Tharpe (1944); " That's All Right " by Arthur Crudup (1946), which was later covered by Elvis Presley in 1954; " The House of Blue Lights " by Ella Mae Morse and Freddie Slack (1946); Wynonie Harris ' " Good Rocking Tonight " (1948); Goree Carter 's "Rock Awhile" (1949); Jimmy Preston 's " Rock the Joint " (1949), also covered by Bill Haley & His Comets in 1952; and " Rocket 88 " by Jackie Brenston and his Delta Cats (in fact, Ike Turner and his band the Kings of Rhythm ), recorded by Sam Phillips for Chess Records in 1951.

In 1951, Cleveland, Ohio , disc jockey Alan Freed began playing rhythm and blues music (then termed " race music ") for a multi-racial audience, and is credited with first using the phrase "rock and roll" to describe the music. Four years later, Bill Haley 's " Rock Around the Clock " (1954) became the first rock and roll song to top Billboard magazine's main sales and airplay charts, and opened the door worldwide for this new wave of popular culture. Other artists with early rock and roll hits included Chuck Berry , Bo Diddley , Fats Domino , Little Richard , Jerry Lee Lewis , and Gene Vincent . Soon rock and roll was the major force in American record sales and crooners , such as Eddie Fisher , Perry Como , and Patti Page , who had dominated the previous decade of popular music, found their access to the pop charts significantly curtailed.

Rock and roll has led to a number of distinct subgenres, including rockabilly, combining rock and roll with "hillbilly" country music, which was usually played and recorded in the mid-1950s by white singers such as Carl Perkins , Jerry Lee Lewis, Roy Orbison , Buddy Holly and with the greatest commercial success, Elvis Presley . Hispanic and Latino American movements in rock and roll, which would eventually lead to the success of Latin rock and Chicano rock within the US, began to rise in the Southwest ; with rock and roll standard musician Ritchie Valens and even those within other heritage genres, such as Al Hurricane along with his brothers Tiny Morrie and Baby Gaby as they began combining rock and roll with country- western within traditional New Mexico music . In addition, the 1950s saw the growth in popularity of the electric guitar, and the development of a specifically rock and roll style of playing through such exponents as Chuck Berry, Link Wray , and Scotty Moore . The use of distortion , pioneered by Western swing guitarists such as Junior Barnard and Eldon Shamblin was popularized by Chuck Berry in the mid-1950s. The use of power chords , pioneered by Francisco Tárrega and Heitor Villa-Lobos in the 19th century and later on by Willie Johnson and Pat Hare in the early 1950s, was popularized by Link Wray in the late 1950s.

Commentators have perceived a decline of rock and roll in the late 1950s and early 1960s. By 1959, the death of Buddy Holly, the Big Bopper and Ritchie Valens in a plane crash, the departure of Elvis for the army, the retirement of Little Richard to become a preacher, prosecutions of Jerry Lee Lewis and Chuck Berry and the breaking of the payola scandal (which implicated major figures, including Alan Freed, in bribery and corruption in promoting individual acts or songs), gave a sense that the rock and roll era established at that point had come to an end.

Rock quickly spread out from its origins in the US, associated with the rapid Americanization that was taking place globally in the aftermath of the Second World War . Cliff Richard is credited with one of the first rock and roll hits outside of North America with " Move It " (1959), effectively ushering in the sound of British rock . Several artists, most prominently Tommy Steele from the UK, found success with covers of major American rock and roll hits before the recordings could spread internationally, often translating them into local languages where appropriate. Steele in particular toured Britain, Scandinavia, Australia, the USSR and South Africa from 1955 to 1957, influencing the globalisation of rock. Johnny O'Keefe 's 1958 record " Wild One " was one of the earliest Australian rock and roll hits. By the late 1950s, as well as in the American-influenced Western world, rock was popular in communist states such as Yugoslavia, and the USSR, as well as in regions such as South America.

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, U.S. blues music and blues rock artists, who had been surpassed by the rise of rock and roll in the US, found new popularity in the UK, visiting with successful tours. Lonnie Donegan 's 1955 hit " Rock Island Line " was a major influence and helped to develop the trend of skiffle music groups throughout the country, many of which, including John Lennon 's Quarrymen (later the Beatles ), moved on to play rock and roll. While former rock and roll market in the US was becoming dominated by lightweight pop and ballads, British rock groups at clubs and local dances were developing a style more strongly influenced by blues-rock pioneers, and were starting to play with an intensity and drive seldom found in white American acts; this influence would go on to shape the future of rock music through the British Invasion .

The first four years of the 1960s have often been seen as an era of hiatus for rock and roll. However, some authors have emphasised innovations and trends in this period without which future developments would not have been possible. While early rock and roll, particularly through the advent of rockabilly, saw the greatest commercial success for male and white performers, in this era the genre was dominated by black and female artists. Rock and roll had not disappeared entirely from music at the end of the 1950s and some of its energy can be seen in the various dance crazes of the early 1960s, started by Chubby Checker 's record " The Twist " (1960). Some music historians have also pointed to important and innovative technical developments that built on rock and roll in this period, including the electronic treatment of sound by such innovators as Joe Meek , and the elaborate production methods of the Wall of Sound pursued by Phil Spector .

The instrumental rock and roll of performers such as Duane Eddy , Link Wray and the Ventures was further developed by Dick Dale , who added distinctive "wet" reverb , rapid alternate picking, and Middle Eastern and Mexican influences. He produced the regional hit " Let's Go Trippin' " in 1961 and launched the surf music craze, following up with songs like " Misirlou " (1962). Like Dale and his Del-Tones , most early surf bands were formed in Southern California, including the Bel-Airs , the Challengers , and Eddie & the Showmen . The Chantays scored a top ten national hit with " Pipeline " in 1963 and probably the best-known surf tune was 1963's " Wipe Out ", by the Surfaris , which hit number 2 and number 10 on the Billboard charts in 1965. Surf rock was also popular in Europe during this time, with the British group the Shadows scoring hits in the early 1960s with instrumentals such as " Apache " (1960) and " Kon-Tiki " (1961), while Swedish surf group the Spotnicks saw success in both Sweden and Britain.

Surf music achieved its greatest commercial success as vocal pop music, particularly the work of the Beach Boys , formed in 1961 in Southern California. Their early albums featured both instrumental surf rock (including covers of music by Dick Dale) and vocal songs, drawing on rock and roll and doo wop and the close harmonies of vocal pop acts like the Four Freshmen . The Beach Boys first chart hit, " Surfin' " (1961), reached the Billboard top 100 and helped make the surf music craze a national phenomenon. The surf music craze and the careers of almost all surf acts were effectively ended by 1965 after the arrival of the British Invasion.

By the end of 1962, what would become the British rock scene had started with beat groups like the Beatles , Gerry & the Pacemakers and the Searchers from Liverpool and Freddie and the Dreamers , Herman's Hermits and the Hollies from Manchester. They drew on a wide range of American influences including 1950s rock and roll, soul, rhythm and blues, and surf music, initially reinterpreting standard American tunes and playing for dancers. Bands like the Animals from Newcastle and Them from Belfast , and those from London like the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds , were more directly influenced by rhythm and blues and later blues music. Soon these groups were composing their own material, combining US forms of music and infusing it with a high energy beat. Beat bands tended towards "bouncy, irresistible melodies", while early British blues acts tended towards less sexually innocent, more aggressive songs, often adopting an anti-establishment stance. There was, however, particularly in the early stages, considerable musical crossover between the two tendencies. By 1963, led by the Beatles, beat groups had begun to achieve national success in Britain, soon to be followed into the charts by the more rhythm and blues focused acts.

" I Want to Hold Your Hand " was the Beatles' first number one hit on the Billboard Hot 100 , spending seven weeks at the top and a total of 15 weeks on the chart. Their first appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show on 9 February 1964, drawing an estimated 73 million viewers (at the time a record for an American television program) is considered a milestone in American pop culture. During the week of 4 April 1964, the Beatles held 12 positions on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart, including the entire top five. The Beatles went on to become the biggest selling rock band of all time and they were followed into the US charts by numerous British bands. During the next two years, British acts dominated their own and the US charts with Peter and Gordon , the Animals, Manfred Mann , Petula Clark , Freddie and the Dreamers, Wayne Fontana and the Mindbenders , Herman's Hermits, the Rolling Stones, the Troggs , and Donovan all having one or more number one singles. Other major acts that were part of the invasion included the Kinks , the Who , and the Dave Clark Five .

The British Invasion helped internationalize the production of rock and roll, opening the door for subsequent British (and Irish) performers to achieve international success. In America it arguably spelled the end of instrumental surf music, vocal girl groups and (for a time) the teen idols , that had dominated the American charts in the late 1950s and 1960s. It dented the careers of established R&B acts like Fats Domino and Chubby Checker and even temporarily derailed the chart success of surviving rock and roll acts, including Elvis. The British Invasion also played a major part in the rise of a distinct genre of rock music, and cemented the primacy of the rock group, based on guitars and drums and producing their own material as singer-songwriters. Following the example set by the Beatles' 1965 LP Rubber Soul in particular, other British rock acts released rock albums intended as artistic statements in 1966, including the Rolling Stones' Aftermath , the Beatles' own Revolver , and the Who's A Quick One , as well as American acts in the Beach Boys ( Pet Sounds ) and Bob Dylan ( Blonde on Blonde ).

Although the first impact of the British Invasion on American popular music was through beat and R&B based acts, the impetus was soon taken up by a second wave of bands that drew their inspiration more directly from American blues , including the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds . British blues musicians of the late 1950s and early 1960s had been inspired by the acoustic playing of figures such as Lead Belly , who was a major influence on the Skiffle craze, and Robert Johnson . Increasingly they adopted a loud amplified sound, often centered on the electric guitar, based on the Chicago blues , particularly after the tour of Britain by Muddy Waters in 1958, which prompted Cyril Davies and guitarist Alexis Korner to form the band Blues Incorporated . The band involved and inspired many of the figures of the subsequent British blues boom, including members of the Rolling Stones and Cream , combining blues standards and forms with rock instrumentation and emphasis.

The other key focus for British blues was John Mayall ; his band, the Bluesbreakers , included Eric Clapton (after Clapton's departure from the Yardbirds) and later Peter Green . Particularly significant was the release of Blues Breakers with Eric Clapton (Beano) album (1966), considered one of the seminal British blues recordings and the sound of which was much emulated in both Britain and the United States. Eric Clapton went on to form supergroups Cream, Blind Faith , and Derek and the Dominos , followed by an extensive solo career that helped bring blues rock into the mainstream. Green, along with the Bluesbreaker's rhythm section Mick Fleetwood and John McVie , formed Peter Green's Fleetwood Mac , who enjoyed some of the greatest commercial success in the genre. In the late 1960s Jeff Beck , also an alumnus of the Yardbirds, moved blues rock in the direction of heavy rock with his band, the Jeff Beck Group . The last Yardbirds guitarist was Jimmy Page , who went on to form The New Yardbirds which rapidly became Led Zeppelin . Many of the songs on their first three albums, and occasionally later in their careers, were expansions on traditional blues songs.

In the United States, blues rock had been pioneered in the early 1960s by guitarist Lonnie Mack ; however, the genre began to take off in the mid-1960s as acts developed a sound similar to British blues musicians. Key acts included Paul Butterfield (whose band acted like Mayall's Bluesbreakers in Britain as a starting point for many successful musicians), Canned Heat , the early Jefferson Airplane , Janis Joplin , Johnny Winter , the J. Geils Band , and Jimi Hendrix with his power trios , the Jimi Hendrix Experience (which included two British members, and was founded in Britain), and Band of Gypsys , whose guitar virtuosity and showmanship would be among the most emulated of the decade. Blues rock bands from the southern states, like the Allman Brothers Band , Lynyrd Skynyrd , and ZZ Top , incorporated country elements into their style to produce the distinctive genre Southern rock .

Blues rock bands often emulated jazz, playing long, involved improvisations, which would later be a major element of progressive rock. From about 1967 bands like Cream and the Jimi Hendrix Experience had moved away from purely blues-based music into psychedelia . By the 1970s, blues rock had become heavier and more riff -based, exemplified by the work of Led Zeppelin and Deep Purple , and the lines between blues rock and hard rock "were barely visible", as bands began recording rock-style albums. The genre was continued in the 1970s by figures such as George Thorogood and Pat Travers , but, particularly on the British scene (except perhaps for the advent of groups such as Status Quo and Foghat who moved towards a form of high energy and repetitive boogie rock ), the subgenre became focused on heavy metal , and blues rock began to slip out of the mainstream.

Garage rock was a raw form of rock music, particularly prevalent in North America in the mid-1960s and so called because of the perception that it was rehearsed in the suburban family garage. Garage rock songs often revolved around the traumas of high school life, with songs about "lying girls" and unfair social circumstances being particularly common. The lyrics and delivery tended to be more aggressive than was common at the time, often with growled or shouted vocals that dissolved into incoherent screaming. They ranged from crude one-chord music (like the Seeds ) to near-studio musician quality (including the Knickerbockers , the Remains , and the Fifth Estate ). There were also regional variations in many parts of the country with flourishing scenes particularly in California and Texas.

The style had been evolving from regional scenes as early as 1958. "Tall Cool One" (1959) by the Wailers (from Tacoma, Washington) and the 1963 version of " Louie Louie " by the Kingsmen (Portland, Oregon) are mainstream examples of the genre in its formative stages. By 1963, garage band singles were creeping into the national charts in greater numbers, including Paul Revere and the Raiders (Boise), the Trashmen (Minneapolis) and the Rivieras (South Bend, Indiana). Other influential garage bands, such as the Sonics (Tacoma, Washington), never reached the Billboard Hot 100 .

The British Invasion greatly influenced garage bands, providing them with a national audience, leading many (often surf or hot rod groups) to adopt a British influence, and encouraging more groups to form. Several garage bands in the United States and Canada produced regional hits during the era. Despite scores of bands being signed to major or large regional labels, most were commercial failures. Garage rock peaked both commercially and artistically around 1966, and by 1968 the style largely disappeared from the national charts and at the local level. New styles had evolved to replace garage rock.

By the 1960s, the scene that had developed out of the American folk music revival had grown to a major movement, using traditional music and new compositions in a traditional style, usually on acoustic instruments. In America the genre was pioneered by figures such as Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger and often identified with progressive or labor politics . In the early sixties figures such as Joan Baez and Bob Dylan had come to the fore in this movement as singer-songwriters. Dylan had begun to reach a mainstream audience with hits including " Blowin' in the Wind " (1963) and " Masters of War " (1963), which brought " protest songs " to a wider public, but, although beginning to influence each other, rock and folk music had remained largely separate genres, often with mutually exclusive audiences.

Early attempts to combine elements of folk and rock included the Animals ' " House of the Rising Sun " (1964), which was the first commercially successful folk song to be recorded with rock and roll instrumentation and the Beatles " I'm a Loser " (1964), arguably the first Beatles song to be influenced directly by Dylan. The folk rock movement is usually thought to have taken off with the Byrds ' recording of Dylan's " Mr. Tambourine Man " which topped the charts in 1965. With members who had been part of the café-based folk scene in Los Angeles, the Byrds adopted rock instrumentation, including drums and 12-string Rickenbacker guitars, which became a major element in the sound of the genre. Later that year Dylan adopted electric instruments, much to the outrage of many folk purists, with his " Like a Rolling Stone " becoming a US hit single. According to Ritchie Unterberger , Dylan (even before his adoption of electric instruments) influenced rock musicians like the Beatles, demonstrating "to the rock generation in general that an album could be a major standalone statement without hit singles", such as on The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan (1963).

Folk rock particularly took off in California, where it led acts like the Mamas & the Papas and Crosby, Stills, and Nash to move to electric instrumentation, and in New York, where it spawned performers including the Lovin' Spoonful and Simon and Garfunkel , with the latter's acoustic " The Sounds of Silence " (1965) being remixed with rock instruments to be the first of many hits. These acts directly influenced British performers like Donovan and Fairport Convention . In 1969 Fairport Convention abandoned their mixture of American covers and Dylan-influenced songs to play traditional English folk music on electric instruments. This British folk-rock was taken up by bands including Pentangle , Steeleye Span and the Albion Band , which in turn prompted Irish groups like Horslips and Scottish acts like the JSD Band , Spencer's Feat and later Five Hand Reel , to use their traditional music to create a brand of Celtic rock in the early 1970s.

Folk-rock reached its peak of commercial popularity in the period 1967–68, before many acts moved off in a variety of directions, including Dylan and the Byrds, who began to develop country rock . However, the hybridization of folk and rock has been seen as having a major influence on the development of rock music, bringing in elements of psychedelia, and helping to develop the ideas of the singer-songwriter, the protest song, and concepts of "authenticity".

Psychedelic music's LSD -inspired vibe began in the folk scene. The first group to advertise themselves as psychedelic rock were the 13th Floor Elevators from Texas. The Beatles introduced many of the major elements of the psychedelic sound to audiences in this period, such as guitar feedback , the Indian sitar and backmasking sound effects. Psychedelic rock particularly took off in California's emerging music scene as groups followed the Byrds ' shift from folk to folk rock from 1965. The psychedelic lifestyle, which revolved around hallucinogenic drugs, had already developed in San Francisco and particularly prominent products of the scene were Big Brother and the Holding Company , the Grateful Dead and Jefferson Airplane . The Jimi Hendrix Experience 's lead guitarist, Jimi Hendrix did
extended distorted, feedback-filled jams which became a key feature of psychedelia. Psychedelic rock reached its apogee in the last years of the decade. 1967 saw the Beatles release their definitive psychedelic statement in Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band , including the track " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds "; the Rolling Stones responded later that year with Their Satanic Majesties Request , and Pink Floyd debuted with The Piper at the Gates of Dawn . Key recordings included Jefferson Airplane's Surrealistic Pillow and the Doors ' self-titled debut album . These trends peaked in the 1969 Woodstock festival , which saw performances by most of the major psychedelic acts.

Sgt. Pepper was later regarded as a starting point for the album era , during which rock music transitioned from the singles format to albums and achieved cultural legitimacy in the mainstream. Led by the Beatles in the mid-1960s, rock musicians advanced the LP as the dominant form of recorded music expression and consumption, initiating a rock-informed album era in the music industry for the next several decades.

Reflecting on developments that occurred in rock music in the early 1970s, Robert Christgau wrote in Christgau's Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies (1981):

The decade is, of course, an arbitrary schema itself—time doesn't just execute a neat turn toward the future every ten years. But like a lot of artificial concepts—money, say—the category does take on a reality of its own once people figure out how to put it to work. "The '60s are over," a slogan one only began to hear in 1972 or so, mobilized all those eager to believe that idealism had become passe, and once they were mobilized, it had. In popular music, embracing the '70s meant both an elitist withdrawal from the messy concert and counterculture scene and a profiteering pursuit of the lowest common denominator in FM radio and album rock .

Rock saw greater commodification during this decade, turning into a multibillion-dollar industry and doubling its market while, as Christgau noted, suffering a significant "loss of cultural prestige". "Maybe the Bee Gees became more popular than the Beatles, but they were never more popular than Jesus ", he said. "Insofar as the music retained any mythic power, the myth was self-referential – there were lots of songs about the rock and roll life but very few about how rock could change the world, except as a new brand of painkiller ... In the '70s the powerful took over, as rock industrialists capitalized on the national mood to reduce potent music to an often reactionary species of entertainment—and to transmute rock's popular base from the audience to market."

Progressive rock, a term sometimes used interchangeably with art rock , moved beyond established musical formulas by experimenting with different instruments, song types, and forms. From the mid-1960s, the Left Banke , the Beatles, the Rolling Stones and the Beach Boys, had pioneered the inclusion of harpsichords , wind , and string sections on their recordings to produce a form of Baroque rock and can be heard in singles like Procol Harum 's " A Whiter Shade of Pale " (1967), with its Bach -inspired introduction. The Moody Blues used a full orchestra on their album Days of Future Passed (1967) and subsequently created orchestral sounds with synthesizers. Classical orchestration, keyboards, and synthesizers were a frequent addition to the established rock format of guitars, bass, and drums in subsequent progressive rock.

Instrumentals were common, while songs with lyrics were sometimes conceptual, abstract, or based in fantasy and science fiction. The Pretty Things ' SF Sorrow (1968), the Kinks' Arthur (Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire) (1969), and the Who 's Tommy (1969) introduced the format of rock operas and opened the door to concept albums , often telling an epic story or tackling a grand overarching theme. King Crimson 's 1969 debut album, In the Court of the Crimson King , which mixed powerful guitar riffs and mellotron with jazz and symphonic music , is often taken as the key recording in progressive rock, helping the widespread adoption of the genre in the early 1970s among existing blues-rock and psychedelic bands, as well as newly formed acts. The vibrant Canterbury scene saw acts following Soft Machine from psychedelia, through jazz influences, toward more expansive hard rock, including Caravan , Hatfield and the North , Gong , and National Health . The French group Magma around drummer Christian Vander almost single-handedly created the new music genre zeuhl with their first albums in the early 1970s.

Pink Floyd also moved away from psychedelia after the departure of Syd Barrett in 1968, with The Dark Side of the Moon (1973) becoming one of the best-selling albums of all time. There was an emphasis on instrumental virtuosity, with Yes showcasing the skills of both guitarist Steve Howe and keyboard player Rick Wakeman , while Emerson, Lake & Palmer (ELP) were a supergroup who produced some of the genre's most technically demanding work. Jethro Tull and Genesis both pursued very different, but distinctly English, brands of music. Renaissance , formed in 1969 by ex-Yardbirds Jim McCarty and Keith Relf, evolved into a high-concept band featuring the three-octave voice of Annie Haslam . Most British bands depended on a relatively small cult following, but a handful, including Pink Floyd, Genesis, and Jethro Tull, managed to produce top ten singles at home and break the American market. The American brand of progressive rock varied from the eclectic and innovative Frank Zappa , Captain Beefheart and Blood, Sweat & Tears , to more pop rock orientated bands like Boston , Foreigner , Kansas , Journey , and Styx . These, beside British bands Supertramp and ELO , all demonstrated a prog rock influence and ranked among the most commercially successful acts of the 1970s, heralding the era of pomp or arena rock . [ citation needed ]

The instrumental strand of the genre resulted in albums like Mike Oldfield 's Tubular Bells (1973), the first record for the Virgin Records label, which became a worldwide hit and a mainstay of the genre. Instrumental rock was particularly significant in continental Europe, allowing bands like Kraftwerk , Tangerine Dream , Can , Focus and Faust to circumvent the language barrier. Their synthesiser-heavy " krautrock ", along with the work of Brian Eno (for a time the keyboard player with Roxy Music ), would be a major influence on subsequent electronic rock .

With the advent of punk rock and technological changes in the late 1970s, progressive rock was increasingly dismissed as pretentious and overblown. Many bands broke up, but some, including Genesis, ELP, Yes, and Pink Floyd, regularly scored top ten albums with successful accompanying worldwide tours. Some bands which emerged in the aftermath of punk, such as Siouxsie and the Banshees , Ultravox , and Simple Minds , showed the influence of progressive rock, as well as their more usually recognized punk influences.

In the late 1960s, jazz-rock emerged as a distinct subgenre out of the blues-rock, psychedelic, and progressive rock scenes, mixing the power of rock with the musical complexity and improvisational elements of jazz. AllMusic states that the term jazz-rock "may refer to the loudest, wildest, most electrified fusion bands from the jazz camp, but most often it describes performers coming from the rock side of the equation." Jazz-rock "...generally grew out of the most artistically ambitious rock subgenres of the late '60s and early '70s", including the singer-songwriter movement. Many early US rock and roll musicians had begun in jazz and carried some of these elements into the new music. In Britain, the subgenre of blues rock, and many of its leading figures, like Ginger Baker and Jack Bruce of the band Cream , had emerged from the British jazz scene. Often highlighted as the first true jazz-rock recording is the only album by the relatively obscure New York–based the Free Spirits with Out of Sight and Sound (1966). The first group of bands to self-consciously use the label were R&B oriented white rock bands that made use of jazzy horn sections, like Electric Flag , Blood, Sweat & Tears and Chicago , to become some of the most commercially successful acts of the late 1960s and early 1970s.

British acts to emerge in the same period from the blues scene, to make use of the tonal and improvisational aspects of jazz, included Nucleus and the Graham Bond and John Mayall spin-off Colosseum . From the psychedelic rock and the Canterbury scenes came Soft Machine, who, it has been suggested, produced one of the artistically successfully fusions of the two genres. Perhaps the most critically praised fusion came from the jazz side of the equation, with Miles Davis , particularly influenced by the work of Hendrix, incorporating rock instrumentation into his sound for the album Bitches Brew (1970). It was a major influence on subsequent rock-influenced jazz artists, including Herbie Hancock , Chick Corea and Weather Report . The genre began to fade in the late 1970s, as a mellower form of fusion began to take its audience, but acts like Steely Dan , Frank Zappa and Joni Mitchell recorded significant jazz-influenced albums in this period, and it has continued to be a major influence on rock music.

Roots rock is the term now used to describe a move away from the psychedelic scene to a more basic form of rock and roll that incorporated its original influences, particularly blues, country and folk music, leading to the creation of country rock and Southern rock. In 1966, Bob Dylan went to Nashville to record the album Blonde on Blonde . This, and subsequent more clearly country-influenced albums, such as Nashville Skyline , have been seen as creating the genre of country folk , a route pursued by a number of largely acoustic folk musicians. Other acts that followed the back-to-basics trend were the Canadian group the Band and the California-based Creedence Clearwater Revival , both of which mixed basic rock and roll with folk, country and blues, to be among the most successful and influential bands of the late 1960s. The same movement saw the beginning of the recording careers of Californian solo artists like Ry Cooder , Bonnie Raitt and Lowell George , and influenced the work of established performers such as the Rolling Stones' Beggar's Banquet (1968) and the Beatles' Let It Be (1970). Reflecting on this change of trends in rock music over the past few years, Christgau wrote in his June 1970 "Consumer Guide" column that this "new orthodoxy" and "cultural lag" abandoned improvisatory, studio-ornamented productions in favor of an emphasis on "tight, spare instrumentation" and song composition: "Its referents are '50s rock, country music, and rhythm-and-blues, and its key inspiration is the Band."

In 1968, Gram Parsons recorded Safe at Home with the International Submarine Band , arguably the first true country rock album. Later that year he joined the Byrds for Sweetheart of the Rodeo (1968), generally considered one of the most influential recordings in the genre. The Byrds continued in the same vein, but Parsons left to be joined by another ex-Byrds member Chris Hillman in forming the Flying Burrito Brothers who helped establish the respectability and parameters of the genre, before Parsons departed to pursue a solo career. Bands in California that adopted country rock included Hearts and Flowers, Poco , New Riders of the Purple Sage , the Beau Brummels , and the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band . Some performers also enjoyed a renaissance by adopting country sounds, including: the Everly Brothers; one-time teen idol Rick Nelson who became the frontman for the Stone Canyon Band; former Monkee Mike Nesmith who formed the First National Band ; and Neil Young . The Dillards were, unusually, a country act, who moved towards rock music. The greatest commercial success for country rock came in the 1970s, with artists including the Doobie Brothers , Emmylou Harris , Linda Ronstadt and the Eagles (made up of members of the Burritos, Poco, and Stone Canyon Band), who emerged as one of the most successful rock acts of all time, producing albums that included Hotel California (1976).

The founders of Southern rock are usually thought to be the Allman Brothers Band, who developed a distinctive sound, largely derived from blues rock , but incorporating elements of boogie , soul, and country in the early 1970s. The most successful act to follow them were Lynyrd Skynyrd, who helped establish the "Good ol' boy" image of the subgenre and the general shape of 1970s' guitar rock. Their successors included the fusion/progressive instrumentalists Dixie Dregs , the more country-influenced Outlaws , funk/R&B-leaning Wet Willie and (incorporating elements of R&B and gospel) the Ozark Mountain Daredevils . After the loss of original members of the Allmans and Lynyrd Skynyrd, the genre began to fade in popularity in the late 1970s, but was sustained the 1980s with acts like .38 Special , Molly Hatchet and the Marshall Tucker Band .

Glam rock emerged from the English psychedelic and art rock scenes of the late 1960s; it can be seen as both an extension of (and reaction against) those trends. Musically diverse, varying between the simple rock and roll revivalism of figures like Alvin Stardust to the complex art rock of Roxy Music, and can be seen as much as a fashion as a musical subgenre. Visually, it was a mesh of various styles, ranging from 1930s Hollywood glamor, through 1950s pin-up sex appeal, pre-war Cabaret theatrics, Victorian literary and symbolist styles, science fiction, to ancient and occult mysticism and mythology ; manifesting itself in outrageous clothes, makeup, hairstyles, and platform-soled boots. Glam is most noted for its sexual and gender ambiguity and representations of androgyny , beside extensive use of theatrics. It was prefigured by the showmanship and gender-identity manipulation of American acts such as the Cockettes and Alice Cooper .

The origins of glam rock are associated with Marc Bolan , who had renamed his folk duo to T. Rex and taken up electric instruments by the end of the 1960s. Often cited as the moment of inception is his appearance on the BBC music show Top of the Pops in March 1971 wearing glitter and satins, to perform what would be his second UK Top 10 hit (and first UK Number 1 hit), " Hot Love ". From 1971, already a minor star, David Bowie developed his Ziggy Stardust persona, incorporating elements of professional make up, mime and performance into his act. These performers were soon followed in the style by acts including Roxy Music, Sweet , Slade , Mott the Hoople , Mud and Alvin Stardust . While highly successful in the single charts in the United Kingdom, very few of these musicians were able to make a serious impact in the United States; Bowie was the major exception becoming an international superstar and prompting the adoption of glam styles among acts like Lou Reed , New York Dolls and Jobriath , often known as "glitter rock" and with a darker lyrical content than their British counterparts. In the UK the term glitter rock was most often used to refer to the extreme version of glam pursued by Gary Glitter and his support musicians the Glitter Band , who between them achieved eighteen top ten singles in the UK between 1972 and 1976. A second wave of glam rock acts, including Suzi Quatro , Roy Wood 's Wizzard and Sparks , dominated the British single charts from about 1974 to 1976. Existing acts, some not usually considered central to the genre, also adopted glam styles, including Rod Stewart , Elton John , Queen and, for a time, even the Rolling Stones. It was also a direct influence on acts that rose to prominence later, including Kiss and Adam Ant , and less directly on the formation of gothic rock and glam metal as well as on punk rock, which helped end the fashion for glam from about 1976. Glam has since enjoyed sporadic modest revivals through bands such as the Darkness and in R&B crossover act Prince .

After the early successes of Latin rock in the 1960s, Chicano musicians like Carlos Santana and Al Hurricane continued to have successful careers throughout the 1970s. Santana opened the decade with success in his 1970 single " Black Magic Woman " on the Abraxas album. [ citation needed ] From 1973 to 1978 he released a series of four albums that all achieved gold status: Welcome , Borboletta , Amigos , and Festivál . Al Hurricane continued to mix his rock music with New Mexico music , though he was also experimenting more heavily with jazz , which led to successful singles, especially on his Vestido Mojado album. Los Lobos gained popularity at this time, with their first album Los Lobos del Este de Los Angeles in 1977.

A strange time, 1971—although rock's balkanization into genres was well underway, it was often hard to tell one catch-phrase from the next. " Art-rock " could mean anything from the Velvets to the Moody Blues , and although Led Zeppelin was launched and Black Sabbath celebrated, " heavy metal " remained an amorphous concept.

From the late 1960s, it became common to divide mainstream rock music into soft and hard rock. Soft rock was often derived from folk rock, using acoustic instruments and putting more emphasis on melody and harmonies. Major artists included Carole King , Cat Stevens and James Taylor . It reached its commercial peak in the mid- to late 1970s with acts like Billy Joel , America and the reformed Fleetwood Mac , whose Rumours (1977) was the best-selling album of the decade. In contrast, hard rock was more often derived from blues-rock and was played louder and with more intensity. It often emphasised the electric guitar, both as a rhythm instrument using simple repetitive riffs and as a solo lead instrument, and was more likely to be used with distortion and other effects. Key acts included British Invasion bands like the Kinks, as well as psychedelic era performers like Cream, Jimi Hendrix and the Jeff Beck Group . Hard rock-influenced bands that enjoyed international success in the late 1970s included Queen , Thin Lizzy , Aerosmith , AC/DC , and Van Halen .

Also from the late 1960s, the term "heavy metal" began to be used to describe some hard rock played with even more volume and intensity, first as an adjective and by the early 1970s as a noun. The term was first used in music in Steppenwolf 's " Born to Be Wild " (1967); the term began to be associated with bands like San Francisco's Blue Cheer , Cleveland's James Gang and Michigan's Grand Funk Railroad . By 1970, three key British bands had developed the characteristic sounds and styles which would help shape the subgenre. Led Zeppelin added elements of fantasy to their riff laden blues-rock, Deep Purple brought in symphonic and medieval interests from their progressive rock phase and Black Sabbath introduced facets of the gothic and modal harmony , helping to produce a "darker" sound. These elements were taken up by a "second generation" of hard rock and heavy metal bands into the late 1970s, including: Judas Priest , UFO , Motörhead and Rainbow from Britain; Kiss , Ted Nugent , and Blue Öyster Cult from the US; Rush from Canada, Golden Earring from the Netherlands and Scorpions from Germany, all marking the expansion in popularity of the subgenre. Despite a lack of airplay and very little presence on the singles charts, late 1970s heavy metal built a considerable following, particularly among adolescent working-class males in North America and Europe.

In the 1980s, bands such as Bon Jovi , Guns N' Roses , Metallica , Mötley Crüe and Def Leppard saw mainstream success, with hard rock and a fusion of hard rock and heavy metal with pop. During the 1990s, hard rock saw a slight decline in popularity, save for some major hits like Guns N' Roses' " November Rain ", and Metallica's " Enter Sandman ".

Rock music has sometimes been criticized by some Christian leaders, who have condemned it as immoral, anti-Christian, and even satanic. However, Christian rock began to develop in the late 1960s, particularly out of the Jesus movement beginning in Southern California, and it emerged as a subgenre in the 1970s with artists like Larry Norman , usually seen as the first major "star" of Christian rock. The genre was mostly a phenomenon in the United States. Many Christian rock performers have ties to the contemporary Christian music scene. Starting in the 1980s, Christian pop performers, as well as hard rock bands like Stryper , have had some mainstream success. Starting in the 1990s, there were increasing numbers of acts who attempted to avoid the Christian band label, preferring to be seen as groups who were also Christians, including P.O.D .

American working-class oriented heartland rock, characterized by a straightforward musical style and a concern with the lives of ordinary, blue-collar American people, developed in the second half of the 1970s. The term heartland rock was first used to describe Midwestern arena rock groups like Kansas , REO Speedwagon and Styx, but which came to be associated with a more socially concerned form of roots rock more directly influenced by folk, country and rock and roll. It has been seen as an American Midwest and Rust Belt counterpart to West Coast country rock and the Southern rock of the American South. Led by figures who had initially been identified with punk and new wave, it was most strongly influenced by acts such as Bob Dylan, the Byrds, Creedence Clearwater Revival and Van Morrison , and the basic rock of 1960s garage and the Rolling Stones.

Exemplified by the commercial success of singer songwriters Bruce Springsteen , Bob Seger , and Tom Petty , it was partly a reaction to post-industrial urban decline in the East and Mid-West, often dwelling on issues of social disintegration and isolation, beside a form of good-time rock and roll revivalism. The genre reached its commercial peak in the mid-1980s, with Springsteen's Born in the USA (1984) topping the charts worldwide and spawning a series of top ten singles, together with the arrival of artists including John Mellencamp , Steve Earle and more gentle singer-songwriters such as Bruce Hornsby .

Heartland rock faded away as a recognized genre by the early 1990s, as rock music in general, and blue-collar and white working class themes in particular, lost influence with younger audiences, and as heartland's artists turned to more personal works.

Punk rock was developed between 1974 and 1976 in the United States and the United Kingdom. Rooted in garage rock and other forms of what is now known as protopunk music, punk rock bands eschewed the perceived excesses of mainstream 1970s rock. They created fast, hard-edged music, typically with short songs, stripped-down instrumentation, and often political, anti-establishment lyrics. Punk embraces a DIY (do it yourself) ethic , with many bands self-producing their recordings and distributing them through informal channels.

By late 1976, acts such as the Ramones and Patti Smith , in New York City, and the Sex Pistols and the Clash , in London, were recognized as the vanguard of a new musical movement. The following year saw punk rock spreading around the world. Punk quickly became a major cultural phenomenon in the UK. The Sex Pistols' live TV skirmish with Bill Grundy on 1 December 1976 was the watershed moment in British punk's transformation into a major media phenomenon, even as some stores refused to stock the records and radio airplay was hard to come by. In May 1977, the Sex Pistols achieved new heights of controversy (and number two on the singles chart) with the song " God Save the Queen ", which referenced Queen Elizabeth II during her Silver Jubilee . For the most part, punk took root in local scenes that tended to reject association with the mainstream. An associated punk subculture emerged, expressing youthful rebellion and characterized by distinctive clothing styles and a variety of ideologies .

By the beginning of the 1980s, faster, more aggressive styles such as hardcore and Oi! had emerged, which evolved into strains of hardcore punk such as D-beat (a distortion-heavy subgenre influenced by the UK band Discharge ), anarcho-punk (e.g. Crass ), grindcore (e.g. Napalm Death ), and crust punk . Musicians identifying with or inspired by punk also pursued a broad range of other variations, giving rise to new wave , post-punk and the alternative rock movement.

Although punk rock was a significant social and musical phenomenon, it achieved less in the way of record sales (being distributed by small specialty labels such as Stiff Records ), or American radio airplay (as the radio scene continued to be dominated by mainstream formats such as disco and album-oriented rock ). Punk rock had attracted devotees from the art and collegiate world and soon bands sporting a more literate, arty approach, such as Talking Heads and Devo , began to infiltrate the punk scene; in some quarters the description "new wave" began to be used to differentiate these less overtly punk bands. Record executives, who had been mostly mystified by the punk movement, recognized the potential of the more accessible new wave acts and began aggressively signing and marketing any band that could claim a remote connection to punk or new wave. Many of these bands, such as the Cars and the Go-Go's , can be seen as pop bands marketed as new wave; other existing acts, including the Police , the Pretenders and Elvis Costello , used the new wave movement as the springboard for relatively long and critically successful careers, while "skinny tie" bands like the Knack played chart-topping power pop , and the photogenic Blondie began as a punk act and moved into lighter and more eclectic territories.

Between 1979 and 1985, influenced by Kraftwerk, Yellow Magic Orchestra , David Bowie and Gary Numan , British new wave went in the direction of such New Romantics as Spandau Ballet , Ultravox , Japan , Duran Duran , A Flock of Seagulls , Culture Club , Talk Talk and the Eurythmics , sometimes using the synthesizer to replace all other instruments. This period coincided with the rise of MTV and led to a great deal of exposure for this brand of synth-pop, creating what has been characterised as a second British Invasion . Some more traditional rock bands were also successful, such as Dire Straits , whose " Money for Nothing " gently poked fun at MTV and Golden Earring a band that had scored a massive hit in the 1970s with " Radar Love " scored another hit in the following decade with " Twilight Zone (Golden Earring song) ", but in general guitar-oriented rock was commercially eclipsed.

If hardcore most directly pursued the stripped down aesthetic of punk, and new wave came to represent its commercial wing, post-punk emerged in the late 1970s and early 1980s as its more artistic and challenging side. In addition to punk bands, major influences included the Velvet Underground , the Stooges and Captain Beefheart . Early contributors to the genre included U.S. bands Pere Ubu , Devo , the Residents , and Talking Heads .

The first wave of British post-punk included Gang of Four , Siouxsie and the Banshees and Joy Division , who placed less emphasis on art than their US counterparts and more on the dark emotional qualities of their music. Bands like Siouxsie and the Banshees, Bauhaus , the Cure , and the Sisters of Mercy , moved increasingly in this direction to found gothic rock, which had become the basis of a major sub-culture by the early 1980s. Similar emotional territory was pursued by Australian acts like the Birthday Party and Nick Cave . Members of Bauhaus and Joy Division explored new stylistic territory as Love and Rockets and New Order respectively. Another early post-punk movement was the industrial music developed by British bands Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire , and New York-based Suicide , using a variety of electronic and sampling techniques that emulated the sound of industrial production and which would develop into a variety of forms of post-industrial music in the 1980s.

The second generation of British post-punk bands that broke through in the early 1980s, including the Fall , the Pop Group , the Mekons , Echo and the Bunnymen and the Teardrop Explodes , tended to move away from dark sonic landscapes. Arguably the most successful band to emerge from post-punk was Ireland's U2 , who incorporated elements of religious imagery together with political commentary into their often anthemic music, and by the late 1980s had become one of the biggest bands in the world. Although many post-punk bands continued to record and perform, it declined as a movement in the mid-1980s as acts disbanded or moved off to explore other musical areas, but it has continued to influence the development of rock music and has been seen as a major element in the creation of the alternative rock movement.

The term alternative rock was coined in the early 1980s to describe rock artists who did not fit into the mainstream genres of the time. Bands dubbed "alternative" had no unified style, but were all seen as distinct from mainstream music. Alternative bands were linked by their collective debt to punk rock, through new wave, post-punk or hardcore. Important alternative rock bands of the 1980s in the US included R.E.M. , Hüsker Dü , Jane's Addiction , Sonic Youth , and the Pixies ; in the UK, popular bands the Cure , New Order , the Jesus and Mary Chain , and the Smiths . Artists were largely confined to independent record labels , building an extensive underground music scene based on college radio , fanzines, touring, and word-of-mouth. They rejected the dominant synth-pop of the early 1980s, marking a return to group-based guitar rock.

Few of these early bands achieved mainstream success, although exceptions to this rule include R.E.M., the Smiths, and the Cure. Despite a general lack of spectacular album sales, the original alternative rock bands exerted a considerable influence on the generation of musicians who came of age in the 1980s and ended up breaking through to mainstream success in the 1990s. Styles of alternative rock in the US during the 1980s included jangle pop , associated with the early recordings of R.E.M., which incorporated the ringing guitars of mid-1960s pop and rock, and college rock, used to describe alternative bands that began in the college circuit and college radio, including acts such as 10,000 Maniacs and the Feelies . In the UK, by the end of the 1980s, indie or dream pop bands like Primal Scream and the Wedding Present , and what were dubbed shoegaze bands like My Bloody Valentine , Slowdive , and Ride entered. Particularly vibrant was the Madchester scene, producing such bands as Happy Mondays and the Stone Roses . The next decade would see the success of grunge in the US and Britpop in the UK, bringing alternative rock into the mainstream.

In the latter half of the 1980s, bands in Washington state (particularly in the Seattle area) formed a new style of rock that contrasted with the mainstream music of the time. The developing genre came to be known as "grunge", a term descriptive of the dirty sound of the music and the unkempt appearance of most musicians, who rebelled against the over-groomed images of other artists. Grunge made heavy use of guitar distortion , fuzz , and feedback . The lyrics were typically apathetic and angst-filled, and often concerned themes such as social alienation and entrapment, although it was also known for its dark humor and parodies of commercial rock.

Bands such as Green River , Soundgarden , and Melvins pioneered the genre, with Mudhoney becoming the most successful by the end of the decade. Grunge remained largely a local phenomenon until 1991, when Nirvana 's album Nevermind became a huge success, containing the anthemic song " Smells Like Teen Spirit ". Nevermind was more melodic than its predecessors; by signing to Geffen Records the band was one of the first to employ traditional corporate promotion and marketing mechanisms such as an MTV video, in store displays and the use of radio "consultants" who promoted airplay at major mainstream rock stations. During 1991 and 1992, other grunge albums such as Pearl Jam 's Ten , Soundgarden's Badmotorfinger , and Alice in Chains ' Dirt , along with the Temple of the Dog album featuring members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden, became among the 100 top-selling albums. Major record labels signed most of the remaining grunge bands in Seattle, while a second influx of acts moved to the city in the hope of success. However, after the death of Kurt Cobain and the subsequent break-up of Nirvana in 1994, the genre began to decline, partly to be overshadowed by Britpop and more commercial sounding post-grunge .

Britpop emerged from the British alternative rock scene of the early 1990s and was characterised by bands particularly influenced by British guitar music of the 1960s and 1970s. The Smiths were a major influence, as were bands of the Madchester scene, which had dissolved in the early 1990s. Britpop was varied in style, but often used catchy tunes and hooks, beside lyrics with particularly British concerns and the adoption of the iconography of the 1960s British invasion, including the symbols of British identity previously used by the mods. It was launched around 1993 with releases by groups such as Suede and Blur , who were soon joined by others including Oasis , Pulp , Supergrass , and Elastica , who produced a series of successful albums and singles. For a while the contest between Blur and Oasis was built by the popular press into the "Battle of Britpop", initially won by Blur, but with Oasis achieving greater long-term and international success, directly influencing later Britpop bands, such as Ocean Colour Scene and Kula Shaker . Britpop groups brought British alternative rock into the mainstream and formed the backbone of a larger British cultural trend known as Cool Britannia . The movement had largely fallen apart by the end of the decade.

The term post-grunge was coined for the bands that followed the emergence into the mainstream of the Seattle grunge bands and emulated their music, but with a more radio-friendly commercially oriented sound. Often they worked through the major labels and incorporated influences from hard rock, pop rock , or alternative metal . The term post-grunge originally was meant to be pejorative, suggesting that grunge bands that emerged when grunge was mainstream were simply musically derivative, or a cynical response to an "authentic" rock movement. From 1995, former Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl 's new band, the Foo Fighters , helped popularize the post-grunge genre.

Some post-grunge bands, like Candlebox , were from Seattle, but the subgenre was marked by a broadening of the geographical base of grunge, with bands like York, Pennsylvania's Live and Georgia's Collective Soul , and beyond the US to Australia's Silverchair and Britain's Bush , who all cemented post-grunge as one of the most commercially viable subgenres of the mid-1990s. Bands like Creed and Nickelback took post-grunge into the late 1990s and 2000s with considerable commercial success, abandoning most of the angst and anger of the original movement for more conventional anthems, narratives and romantic songs, and were followed in this vein by newer acts including Shinedown , Seether , 3 Doors Down and Puddle of Mudd .

The origins of 1990s pop-punk can be seen in the more song-oriented bands of the 1970s punk movement like Buzzcocks and the Clash , commercially successful new wave acts such as the Jam and the Undertones , and the more hardcore-influenced elements of alternative rock in the 1980s. Pop-punk tends to use power-pop melodies and chord changes with speedy punk tempos and loud guitars. Punk music provided the inspiration for some California-based bands on independent labels in the early 1990s, including Rancid and Green Day . In 1994, Green Day moved to a major label and produced the album Dookie , which found a new, largely teenage, audience and proved a surprise diamond-selling success, leading to a series of hit singles, including two number ones in the US. They were soon followed by the eponymous debut from Weezer , which spawned three top ten singles in the US. This success opened the door for the multi-platinum sales of metallic punk band the Offspring with Smash (1994). This first wave of pop punk reached its commercial peak with Green Day's Nimrod (1997) and the Offspring's Americana (1998).

A second wave of pop-punk was spearheaded by Blink-182 , with their breakthrough album Enema of the State (1999), followed by bands such as Good Charlotte , Simple Plan and Sum 41 , who made use of humour in their videos and had a more radio-friendly tone to their music, while retaining the speed, some of the attitude and even the look of 1970s punk. Later pop-punk bands, including All Time Low , the All-American Rejects and Fall Out Boy , had a sound that has been described as closer to 1980s hardcore, while still achieving commercial success.

In the 1980s the terms indie rock and alternative rock were used interchangeably. By the mid-1990s, as elements of the movement began to attract mainstream interest, particularly grunge and then Britpop, post-grunge and pop-punk, the term alternative began to lose its meaning. Those bands following the less commercial contours of the scene were increasingly referred to by the label indie. Linked by an ethos more than a musical approach, the indie rock movement encompassed a wide range of styles, from hard-edged, grunge-influenced bands like the Cranberries and Superchunk , through do-it-yourself experimental bands like Pavement , to punk-folk singers such as Ani DiFranco . It has been noted that indie rock has a relatively high proportion of female artists compared with preceding rock genres, a tendency exemplified by the development of feminist-informed Riot grrrl music. Many countries have developed an extensive local indie scene, flourishing with bands with enough popularity to survive inside the respective country, but virtually unknown outside them.

By the end of the 1990s many recognisable subgenres, most with their origins in the late 1980s alternative movement, were included under the umbrella of indie. Lo-fi eschewed polished recording techniques for a D.I.Y. ethos and was spearheaded by Beck , Sebadoh and Pavement . The work of Talk Talk and Slint helped inspire both post rock, an experimental style influenced by jazz and electronic music (exemplified by acts such as Bark Psychosis , Tortoise , Stereolab , and Laika ), as well as leading to more dense and complex, guitar-based math rock, developed by acts like Polvo and Chavez . Space rock looked back to progressive roots, with drone heavy and minimalist acts like Spacemen 3 , the two bands created out of its split, Spectrum and Spiritualized , and later groups including Flying Saucer Attack , Godspeed You! Black Emperor and Quickspace . In contrast, sadcore emphasised pain and suffering through melodic use of acoustic and electronic instrumentation in the music of bands like American Music Club and Red House Painters , while the revival of baroque pop reacted against lo-fi and experimental music by placing an emphasis on melody and classical instrumentation, with artists like Arcade Fire , Belle and Sebastian and Rufus Wainwright .

Alternative metal emerged from the hardcore scene of alternative rock in the US in the later 1980s, but gained a wider audience after grunge broke into the mainstream in the early 1990s. Early alternative metal bands mixed a wide variety of genres with hardcore and heavy metal sensibilities, with acts like Jane's Addiction and Primus using progressive rock, Soundgarden and Corrosion of Conformity using garage punk, the Jesus Lizard and Helmet mixing noise rock , Ministry and Nine Inch Nails influenced by industrial music , Monster Magnet moving into psychedelia , Pantera , Sepultura and White Zombie creating groove metal , while Biohazard , Limp Bizkit and Faith No More turned to hip-hop and rap.

Hip-hop had gained attention from rock acts in the early 1980s, including the Clash with " The Magnificent Seven " (1980) and Blondie with " Rapture " (1980). Early crossover acts included Run DMC and the Beastie Boys . Rappers who sampled rock songs included Ice-T , the Fat Boys , LL Cool J , Public Enemy and Whodini . The mixing of thrash metal and rap was pioneered by Anthrax on their 1987 comedy-influenced single " I'm the Man ".

In 1990, Faith No More broke into the mainstream with their single " Epic ", often seen as the first truly successful combination of heavy metal with rap. This paved the way for the success of existing bands like 24-7 Spyz and Living Colour , and new acts including Rage Against the Machine and Red Hot Chili Peppers , who all fused rock and hip-hop among other influences. Among the first wave of performers to gain mainstream success as rap rock were 311 , Bloodhound Gang , and Kid Rock . A more metallic sound – nu metal – was pursued by bands including Limp Bizkit, Korn and Slipknot . Later in the decade this style, which contained a mix of grunge, punk, metal, rap and turntable scratching , spawned a wave of successful bands like Linkin Park , P.O.D. and Staind , who were often classified as rap metal or nu metal, the first of which are the best-selling band of the genre.

In 2001, nu metal reached its peak with albums like Staind's Break the Cycle , P.O.D's Satellite , Slipknot's Iowa and Linkin Park's Hybrid Theory . New bands also emerged like Disturbed , Godsmack and Papa Roach , whose major label debut Infest became a platinum hit. By 2002, nu metal bands were played more infrequently on rock radio stations and MTV began focusing on pop-punk and emo . Since then, many bands have changed to a more conventional hard rock, heavy metal, or electronic music sound.

From about 1997, emerging bands began to avoid the Britpop label while still producing music derived from it. Many of these bands tended to mix elements of British traditional rock (or British trad rock), particularly the Beatles, Rolling Stones and Small Faces , with American influences, including post-grunge. Drawn from across the United Kingdom, the themes of their music tended to be less parochially centered on British, English and London life and more introspective than had been the case with Britpop at its height. Several alternative bands that had enjoyed some success during the mid-1990s, but did not find major commercial success until the late 1990s, included the Verve and Radiohead . The Verve's album Urban Hymns (1997) was a worldwide hit, and Radiohead achieved near-universal critical acclaim with their experimental third album OK Computer (1997).

Post-Britpop bands have been seen as presenting the image of the rock star as an ordinary person and their increasingly melodic music was criticised for being bland or derivative. Post-Britpop bands like Travis from The Man Who (1999), Stereophonics from Performance and Cocktails (1999), Feeder from Echo Park (2001), and particularly Snow Patrol from Final Straw (2003), Keane from their debut album Hopes and Fears (2004), and Coldplay from their debut album Parachutes (2000), achieved wider international success than many of the Britpop groups that had preceded them, and were some of the most commercially successful acts of the late 1990s and early 2000s.

Post-hardcore developed in the US, particularly in Chicago and Washington, D.C., in the 1980s, with bands that were inspired by the do-it-yourself ethics and guitar-heavy music of hardcore punk, but influenced by post-punk, adopting longer song formats, more complex musical structures and sometimes more melodic vocal styles.

Emo also emerged from the hardcore scene in 1980s Washington, D.C., initially as "emocore", used as a term to describe bands who favored expressive vocals over the more common abrasive, barking style. Emo broke into mainstream culture in the early 2000s with the platinum-selling success of Jimmy Eat World 's Bleed American (2001) and Dashboard Confessional 's The Places You Have Come to Fear the Most (2003). The new emo had a much more mainstream sound than in the 1990s and a far greater appeal among adolescents than its earlier incarnations. At the same time, use of the term emo expanded beyond the musical genre, becoming associated with fashion, a hairstyle and any music that expressed emotion. By 2003 post-hardcore bands had also caught the attention of major labels and began to enjoy mainstream success in the album charts. [ citation needed ] A number of these bands were seen as a more aggressive offshoot of emo and given the often vague label of screamo .

In the early 2000s, a new group of bands that played a stripped down and back-to-basics version of guitar rock, emerged into the mainstream. They were variously characterised as part of a garage rock, post-punk or new wave revival . Because the bands came from across the globe, cited diverse influences (from traditional blues, through new wave to grunge), and adopted differing styles of dress, their unity as a genre has been disputed. There had been attempts to revive garage rock and elements of punk in the 1980s and 1990s; by 2000, scenes had grown up in several countries.

The commercial breakthrough from these scenes was led by four bands: the Strokes , who emerged from the New York club scene with their debut album Is This It (2001); the White Stripes , from Detroit, with their third album White Blood Cells (2001); the Hives from Sweden after their compilation album Your New Favourite Band (2001); and the Vines from Australia with Highly Evolved (2002). They were dubbed by the media as "the saviours of rock 'n' roll". A second wave of bands that gained international recognition due to the movement included Yeah Yeah Yeahs , the Killers , Interpol and Kings of Leon from the US, the Libertines , Arctic Monkeys , Bloc Party , Editors , Kaiser Chiefs and Franz Ferdinand from the UK, and Jet and Wolfmother from Australia.

In the 2000s, as computer technology became more accessible and music software advanced, it became possible to create high quality music using little more than a single laptop computer. This resulted in a massive increase in the amount of home-produced electronic music available to the general public via the expanding internet. These techniques also began to be used by existing bands and by developing genres that mixed rock with digital techniques and sounds, including electroclash , dance-punk , dance rock and new rave . [ citation needed ]

Metalcore originated in the late 1980s combining elements of extreme metal and hardcore punk . Metalcore is noted for its use of breakdowns , which are slow, intense passages conducive to moshing , while other defining instrumentation includes heavy and percussive pedal point guitar riffs and double bass drumming . In the late 1980s to early 1990s, pioneering bands such as Integrity , Earth Crisis and Converge were founded. During the 1990s, the genre diversified, with the Dillinger Escape Plan , Botch and Coalesce pioneering mathcore .

In the 2010s and through to the 2020s, the genre saw even greater commercial success, with Bring Me the Horizon 's album Post Human: Survival Horror (2020) and Architects ' For Those That Wish to Exist (2021) both reaching number one in the UK album charts.

During the 2010s, rock music declined from its position as the major popular music genre, now sharing with electronic dance and hip-hop , the latter of which had surpassed it as the most consumed musical genre in the United States by 2017. The rise of streaming and the advent of technology, which changed approaches toward music creation, were cited as major factors. Ken Partridge of Genius suggested that the stagnation of rock music and rising popularity of hip-hop is the result of changing social attitudes during the 2010s. Bill Flanagan, in a 2016 opinion piece for The New York Times , compared the state of rock during this period to the state of jazz in the early 1980s: "Its form is mostly fixed."

The rock bands which had chart success in the 2010s were mostly associated with the trends that had been popular in the 2000s and earlier decades rather than reflecting new scenes and sounds. Some pop rock and hard rock bands continued to see commercial success during this period, including Ghost , Maroon 5 , Twenty One Pilots , Fall Out Boy , Imagine Dragons , Halestorm , Panic! at the Disco , Greta Van Fleet , and the Black Keys .

Psychedelic and progressive styles in rock have seen a resurgence in popularity during the 2010s and 2020s. Some of the most notable acts in neo-psychedelia originated in Australia, such as King Gizzard & the Lizard Wizard and Kevin Parker 's Tame Impala . The latter released well received albums such as Lonerism (2012) and Currents (2015). This new Australian psychedelic music not only built on the psychedelic and progressive rock acts of the 1960s and 1970s, but also incorporated musical influences from heavy metal , EDM , and world music . A 2014 article in The Guardian described Australia as a place where "independently minded rock bands are free to develop at their own pace".

Psychedelic trends in rock have also seen a revival in Europe, which has been described as "really good" for new psychedelic music, with many American stoner rock bands choosing to tour in Europe as opposed to North America. In 2013, Queens of the Stone Age 's album ...Like Clockwork topped the charts in several countries.

In the late 2010s and early 2020s, a new wave of post-punk bands from Britain and Ireland emerged. Artists that have been identified as part of this wave include Squid , Fontaines D.C. and Idles . Post-punk artists that attained prominence in the 2010s and early 2020s from other countries besides the UK included Geese (United States), Kælan Mikla (Iceland), and Viagra Boys (Sweden), as well as the so-called "Russian doomer music" scene consisting of post-punk, coldwave and darkwave bands from post-Soviet countries like Russia and Belarus, most prominently Molchat Doma (Belarus).

At the start of the 2020s, pop and rap music artists released successful pop-punk-influenced recordings, including Machine Gun Kelly 's 2020 album Tickets to My Downfall , which topped the Billboard 200, and Olivia Rodrigo 's number-one hit single " Good 4 U " (2021).

During the mid-to-late 2010s, some bands gained notoriety for emulating rock styles of the late 1960s and 1970s popular on classic rock radio. Guitar World described this back-to-basics revival as "hard-hitting, swaggering, riff-driven rock 'n' roll built around a core vocal-guitar-bass-drum configuration". Groups considered to be a part of this trend include Greta Van Fleet , Rival Sons , and Larkin Poe .

Different subgenres of rock were adopted by, and became central to, the identity of a large number of sub-cultures . In the 1950s and 1960s, respectively, British youths adopted the Teddy Boy and rocker subcultures, which revolved around US rock and roll. The counterculture of the 1960s was associated with much of the rock music of the era. The mid- to late 1970s punk subculture began in the US and spread worldwide. The goth and emo subcultures that grew later presented distinctive visual styles.

When an international rock culture developed, it supplanted cinema as the major source of fashion influence. However, followers of rock music have often mistrusted the world of fashion, which has been seen as elevating image above substance. Rock fashions have been seen as combining elements of different cultures and periods, as well as expressing divergent views on sexuality and gender, and rock music in general has been noted and criticised for facilitating greater sexual freedom. Rock has also been associated with various forms of drug use, including the amphetamines taken by mods in the early to mid-1960s, the LSD , mescaline and other hallucinogenic drugs linked with psychedelic rock in the mid- to late 1960s and early 1970s; and sometimes cannabis , cocaine and heroin, all of which have been eulogised in song.

Rock has been credited with changing attitudes to race by opening up African-American culture to white audiences. However, at the same time, rock has been accused of appropriating and exploiting that culture. Rock music has absorbed many influences and introduced Western audiences to different musical traditions, and inherited the folk tradition of protest song , making political statements on subjects such as war, religion, poverty, civil rights, justice and the environment. Activism reached a mainstream peak with the " Do They Know It's Christmas? " single (1984) and Live Aid concert for Ethiopia in 1985, which, while raising awareness of world poverty and funds for aid, have also been criticised (along with similar events), for providing a stage for self-aggrandisement and increased profits for the rock stars involved.

Since its early development, rock music has been associated with rebellion against social and political norms, most in early rock and roll's rejection of an adult-dominated culture, the counterculture's rejection of consumerism and conformity and punk's rejection of all forms of social convention; however, it can also be seen as providing a means of commercial exploitation of such ideas and of diverting youth away from political action.

According to Schaap and Berkers, playing in a band is a peer group experience "shaped by existing sex-segregated friendship networks". They write: "Several scholars have argued that men exclude women from bands or from the bands' rehearsals, recordings, performances, and other social activities ... Women are mainly regarded as passive and private consumers of allegedly slick, prefabricated – hence, inferior – pop music, excluding them from participating as high status rock musicians".

In the early decades of rock music, rebellion "was largely a male rebellion; the women—often, in the 1950s and 60s, girls in their teens—in rock usually sang songs as personae, utterly dependent on their macho boyfriends." Philip Auslander says that "although there were many women in rock by the late 1960s, most performed only as singers, a traditionally feminine position in popular music." Some women played instruments in American all-female garage rock bands , but none of these bands achieved more than regional success. When Suzi Quatro emerged in 1973, "no other prominent female musician worked in rock simultaneously as a singer, instrumentalist, songwriter, and bandleader".

An all-female band is a musical group that is exclusively composed of female musicians . This is distinct from a girl group, in which the female members are vocalists, though this terminology is not universally followed.



Iran has a developing mixed economy that is centrally planned through its large public sector . With a population of over 90 million, Iran has an economic output of $362.68 billion in nominal GDP and $1.78 trillion as measured by purchasing power parity (PPP) as of 2026. Its energy sector is home to 10% of the world's proven oil reserves and 15% of the world's gas reserves , often projecting Iran as an " energy superpower ".

Since the 1979 Islamic revolution , the Iranian economy has experienced slower economic growth, high inflation, and recurring crises. A variety of armed conflicts in the region have exacerbated economic pressures from 1980s to the 2020s. The nation has experienced varied levels of " brain drain " due to Iranians seeking overseas employment or immigration. Inflation in Iran has been persistent and caused mass protests.

The nation's nuclear program and foreign policy have placed Iran under sustained international sanctions , deterring foreign and domestic investment with adverse humanitarian impact. The periodic lifting of these sanctions have supported an emerging tourism industry. Its official currency, the Iranian rial , has fallen significantly since the 2010s, leading to mass protests over its purchasing power. Iran maintains low international rankings on economic freedom and " ease of doing business ".

In 546 BC, Croesus of Lydia was defeated and captured by the Persians , who then adopted gold as the main metal for their coins. There are accounts in the biblical Book of Esther of dispatches being sent from Susa to provinces as far out as India and the Kingdom of Kush during the reign of Xerxes the Great (485–465 BC). By the time of Herodotus (c. 475 BC), the Royal Road of the Persian Empire ran some 2,857 km from the city of Susa on the Karun (250 km east of the Tigris) to the port of Smyrna (modern İzmir in Turkey) on the Aegean Sea .

Modern agriculture in Iran dates back to the 1850s when Amir Kabir undertook a number of changes to the traditional agricultural system. Such changes included importing modified seeds and signing collaboration contracts with other countries. Polyakov 's Bank Esteqrazi was bought in 1898 by the Tsarist government of Russia , and later passed into the hands of the Iranian government by a contract in 1920. The bank continued its activities under the name of Bank Iran until 1933 when incorporating the newly founded Keshavarzi Bank .

The Imperial Bank of Persia was established in 1885, with offices in all major cities of Persia. Reza Shah Pahlavi (r. 1925–41) improved the country's overall infrastructure, implemented educational reform, campaigned against foreign influence, reformed the legal system, and introduced modern industries. During this time, Iran experienced a period of social change, economic development, and relative political stability.

Reza Shah Pahlavi, who abdicated in 1941, was succeeded by his son, Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi (r. 1941–79). No fundamental change occurred in the economy of Iran during World War II and the years immediately following. Between 1954 and 1960 a rapid increase in oil revenues and sustained foreign aid led to greater investment and fast-paced economic growth, primarily in the government sector. Subsequently, inflation increased, the value of the national currency, the rial, depreciated, and a foreign-trade deficit developed. Economic policies implemented to combat these problems led to declines in the rates of nominal economic growth and per capita income by 1961.

Prior to 1979, Iran developed rapidly, as surging global oil revenues in the 1970s flooded the country with capital, with rapid GDP and per-capita income expansion. Traditionally agricultural, by the 1970s, the country had undergone significant industrialization and modernization. The pace slowed by 1978 as capital flight reached $30 to $40 billion 1980-US dollars just before the revolution . Furthermore, economic prosperity heavily favored urban elites, leaving many rural and traditional communities marginalized. The Shah's earlier land reforms upended traditional rural economies and forced massive, unplanned migration to the cities, forcing migrants into settlements without water or electricity. These deeply religious rural migrants faced extreme poverty while living right next to the wealthy, Westernized elite. Known as the Mostazafin (the oppressed), the marginalized population became the muscle of the street protests against the monarchy, mobilized by the Islamic clergy's promises of social justice.

Following the revolution, subsequent nationalizations of industries in 1979 and the outbreak of the Iran–Iraq War , over 80% of the economy came under government control. [ citation needed ] The eight-year war with Iraq claimed at least 300,000 Iranian lives and injured more than 500,000. The cost of the war to Iran's economy was some $500 billion.

After hostilities ceased in 1988, the government tried to develop the country's communications, transportation, manufacturing, health care, education and energy sectors, including its prospective nuclear power facilities , and began integrating its communication and transportation systems with those of neighboring states.

The government's long-term objectives since the revolution were stated as economic independence , full employment , and a comfortable standard of living but Iran's population had more than doubled between 1980 and 2000 and its median age declined. Although many Iranians are farmers, agricultural production has consistently fallen since the 1960s. By the late 1990s, Iran imported much of its food. At that time, economic hardship in the countryside resulted in many people moving to cities .

Following the war, the reformist Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani 's administration advocated a fundamental reorientation and liberalization of Iran's economy, along with efforts to reverse Iran's international isolation. Rafsanjani's agenda included infrastructure development, the privatization of state enterprises, foreign exchange liberalization, the establishment of free-trade zones and the elimination of subsidies and price controls. However, this upward trajectory was derailed by domestic political friction and economic policy errors. Uncontrolled government spending and heightened consumer demand triggered severe inflation, sparking riots across multiple Iranian cities in 1992 and 1994. Fearing instability, domestic private entities resisted investing, while international partners were driven away by political volatility and tightened U.S. sanctions implemented after 1995. Simultaneously, weak global oil prices in the early 1990s sparked a major currency and debt crisis. In response, Rafsanjani froze infrastructure projects, reinstated foreign exchange controls, rescheduled foreign debts and abandoned plans to reform state subsidies. Politically, Rafsanjani faced heavy domestic resistance as Islamic leftists committed to state-controlled economics initially blocked his free-market initiatives while traditional conservatives sabotaged his second term by fighting his attempts to loosen Islamic social and cultural laws.

The 1997 election of Mohammad Khatami sparked a reform movement by Islamic leftists that ultimately failed to restructure the nation's power dynamics. From its inception, the movement prioritized social, cultural, and political changes with their approach heavily shaped by their deep-seated distrust of the free market and frustration with the corruption and repression of the Rafsanjani administration. Furthermore, fears arose among leftists on the chaotic nature of economic deregulation that could erode the public support for reforms.

During his presidency, Khatami achieved a solid ground in implementing serious economic restructuring. Among his accomplishments was unifying the official exchange rate with the parallel exchange rate , establishing an Oil Stabilization Fund as a cushion against market volatility, authorizing the first post-revolutionary private banks, pushing through some improvements to foreign investment frameworks, stewarding the economy through a tumultuous period of unprecedented low oil revenues and luring new interest and investment from the Western world.

However, more ambitious plans, including efforts to reduce the costly energy subsidies was met by opposition from conservative parliamentarians as they adopted obstructionist approach to Khatami's economic agenda, as means of subverting his political and cultural reforms. Khatami also found himself confronted with the onset of a global recession in the early 2000s, a deep slump in oil prices, persistent inflation, unemployment and economic mismanagement while his response was a typically cautious array of small-scale economic initiatives that bore little results.

The election of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad brought about economic promises with populist appeal, having pledged to the re-distribution of oil revenues during the 2000s commodities boom , which sustained illusory growth rates and brought an epic influx of revenues and foreign exchange. The rise of Asia as a commercial counterweight to Iran's historic trade partners in Europe, enabled Tehran to blunt the impact of sanctions. After the United Arab Emirates , China became the largest source of Iran's imports, and Asian states purchased more Iranian oil than any other region. Ahmadinejad took an assertive and problematic role on policy by expanding credit and spending in a freewheeling fashion, feuding openly with Central Bank chiefs, dismantling the bureaucracy, disempowering government technocrats and reveling in the reverberations of the global economic meltdown in 2008. His provocative rhetoric on Israel and Iran's continuing defiance of U.N. Security Council resolutions on its nuclear program heightened the sense of political risk and persuaded foreign investors to leave voluntarily.

Ahmadinejad also move boldly against the longstanding distortions plaguing Iran's economy, such as subsidies and state dominance, but in a counterproductive way. Privatization benefited mainly state-affiliated companies, particularly those associated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guards, whose retirement funds took a majority stake in the state telecommunications firm in 2009. Ahmadinejad's assiduous use of economic issues made him especially vulnerable, especially after mood inside Iran soured as the global economic slowdown in 2009 began to impact Iran and the price of oil crashed to less than one-third of its 2008 high. Senior political figures and renowned economists were also sharply critical of Ahmadinejad's spending and interventionist approach, while strikes by bazaaris in 2008 and 2010 forced the government to delay or abandon planned tax hikes.

In 2007 the Iranian subsidy reform plan introduced price controls and subsidies particularly on food and energy. Contraband , administrative controls, widespread corruption , and other restrictive factors undermine private sector-led growth . The government's 20-year vision involved market-based reforms reflected in a five-year development plan, 2016 to 2021, focusing on "a resilient economy" and " progress in science and technology ". Most of Iran's exports are oil and gas, accounting for a majority of government revenue in 2010. In March 2022, the Iranian parliament under the then new president Ebrahim Raisi decided to eliminate a major subsidy for importing food, medicines and animal feed, valued at $15 billion in 2021. Also in March 2022, 20 billion tons of basic goods exports from Russia including vegetable oil, wheat, barley and corn were agreed.

Due to its relative isolation from global financial markets, Iran was initially able to avoid recession in the aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis . However, following expansion of international sanctions related to Iran's nuclear program , the Iranian rial fell to a record low of 23,900 to the US dollar in September 2012.

2025 was marked by a collapsing currency, surging inflation causing widespread unrest. The Iranian rial plummeted to record lows, trading well above one million rials to the U.S. dollar, contributing to inflation rates exceeding 40% and sharply rising prices for basic commodities, causing hardships and nationwide protests. By December 2025, the rial weakened to roughly 1.3–1.5 million per U.S. dollar on open markets, imposing heavy pressure on domestic prices and living standards. Inflation surged with annual inflation in 2025 reaching or exceeding the 40% range, with food and essential goods prices in some cases climbing by 50% or more.

In late December 2025, the government replaced the head of the Central Bank of Iran in an attempt to steady the economy. By early 2026, the crisis had contributed to significant social strain. Official data for January 2026 indicated monthly inflation around 8% overall and nearly 14% for food and beverages. Food inflation alone approached roughly 90% year-on-year. Annual inflation also rose further to about 44.6% in January 2026.

The Twelve-Day War with Israel in June 2025 had a profound short-term impact on Iran's economy . The economic toll was significant: Iran's oil exports plunged by 94% during the war, dropping from about 1.7 million barrels per day to barely 100,000, due to damage and fear of tanker transit in the Persian Gulf. On the other side, Israeli and U.S. strikes caused billions in physical damage: dozens of military facilities, communication centers, and at least 120 residential buildings in Tehran were destroyed or severely damaged. After 12 days, Iran agreed to a ceasefire; an Iranian MP on parliament's economic commission admitted Iran's economy "lacks the resilience for a decisive battle" and that the financial strain was a key reason Iran could not prolong the war. The war's aftermath brought even tighter U.S. sanctions. Enforcement on oil smuggling was intensified by Western navies. The currency, which had plunged during the conflict, remained very weak (around 1.3 million rials per USD by mid-late 2025).

Iran's national science budget in 2005 was about $900 million, roughly equivalent to the 1990 figure. By early 2000, Iran allocated around 0.4% of its GDP to research and development , ranking the country behind the world average of 1.4%. In 2009 the ratio of research to GDP was 0.87% against the government's medium-term target of 2.5%. Iran ranked first in scientific growth in the world in 2011 and 17th in science production in 2012. [ citation needed ] Iran has a broad and diversified industrial base .

According to The Economist , Iran ranked 39th in a list of industrialized nations, producing $23 billion of industrial products in 2008. Between 2008 and 2009 Iran moved to 28th from 69th place in annual industrial production growth because of its relative isolation from the 2008 financial crisis and because the price of oil reached an alltime high in the first half of 2008. In the early 21st century the service sector was Iran's largest, followed by industry (mining and manufacturing) and agriculture.

Iran's long-term economic growth since the 1979 Islamic Revolution has been far below its pre-revolution performance. According to Central Bank data, GDP grew on average only about 1.9% per year from 1979 to 2020, compared to 9.1% annually in 1960–1979 before the revolution. The Iran–Iraq War (1980–88) caused a deep recession : during 1981–89 Iran's GDP grew only 0.9% annually on average, the lowest of any period, as war destruction and revolutionary upheaval crippled output. In the early 1990s, after the war, Iran saw a rebound – President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani's administration (1989–1997) achieved about 5.5% average growth by rebuilding infrastructure and liberalizing parts of the economy.

After a modest recovery in 2020–2022, the International Monetary Fund and World Bank estimated Iran's real GDP growth at around 2–5% in 2022–2024, partly due to higher oil prices and improved non-oil output. 2025 was worse: after new U.S. sanctions and the mid-2025 conflict, the IMF projected near zero growth (0.3%) for 2025, revising down earlier forecasts. Oil production and exports have been constrained by sanctions and the 2025 war damage; Iran's oil exports, which averaged ~1.4–1.7 million barrels/day in 2024, were expected to drop by several hundred thousand barrels in 2025 under sanctions.

According to the IMF estimations, in 2026 Iran’s economy is roughly one-fifth the size of Saudi Arabia and Turkey, less than half the size of the UAE and Israel, and it is about 20% smaller than Kazakhstan’s economy.

The IMF projects that in 2026 the economy will contract by 6.1% and the inflation rate will reach to 68.9%.

Before 2010, expansion of public healthcare and international relations were the other main objectives of the fifth plan, an ambitious series of measures that included subsidy reform , banking recapitalization, currency reform, taxation , customs , construction, employment, nationwide goods and services distribution, social justice and productivity. The intent was to make the country self-sufficient by 2015 and replace the payment of $100 billion in subsidies annually with targeted social assistance . These reforms target Iran's major sources of inefficiency and price distortion and are likely to lead to major restructuring of almost all economic sectors.

By removing energy subsidies around 2010, Iran intended to make its industries more efficient and competitive. By 2016, one third of Iran's economic growth was expected to originate from productivity improvement. Energy subsidies left the economy as one of the world's least energy-efficient, with energy intensity three times the global average and 2.5 times higher than the Middle Eastern average. Notwithstanding its own issues, the banking sector was seen (2010) as a potential hedge against the removal of subsidies, as the plan is not expected to directly impact banks.

Iran's budget is established by the Management and Planning Organization of Iran and proposed by the government to the parliament before the year's end . Following approval of the budget by Majlis , the central bank presents a detailed monetary and credit policy to the Money and Credit Council (MCC) for approval. Thereafter, major elements of these policies are incorporated into the five-year economic development plan. The plan is part of "Vision 2025", a strategy for long-term sustainable growth.

Since the 1979 revolution, government spending has averaged 59% on social policies, 17% on economic matters, 15% on national defense , and 13% on general affairs. Payments averaged 39% on education , health and social security , 20% on other social programs, 3% on agriculture , 16% on water , power and gas , 5% on manufacturing and mining , 12% on roads and transportation and 5% on other economic affairs. Iran's investment reached 27.7% of GDP in 2009. Between 2002 and 2006, inflation fluctuated around 14%.

In 2008, around 55% of government revenue came from oil and natural gas revenue , with 31% from taxes and fees . There are virtually millions of people who do not pay taxes in Iran and hence operate outside the formal economy . The budget for year 2012 was $462 billion, 9% less than 2011. The budget is based on an oil price of $85 per barrel. The value of the US dollar is estimated at IRR 12,260 for the same period.

According to the head of the Department of Statistics of Iran, if the rules of budgeting were observed the government could save at least 30 to 35% on its expenses. The central bank's interest rate is 21%, and the inflation rate has climbed to 22% in 2012, 10% higher than in 2011. There is little alignment between fiscal and monetary policy . According to the Central Bank of Iran , the gap between the rich and the poor narrowed because of monthly subsidies but the trend could reverse if high inflation persists.

According to official data, as of 2023 Iran spends 10.3 billion USD or 2.1% of its GDP on national defense. This percentage is similar to that in other countries such as UK, France and Finland . In 2025, the Iranian budget bill granted 51% of the total oil and gas export revenues, estimated at 12 billion euros, to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and the Law Enforcement Command (LEF).

Iran also finances Hezbollah , the Yemeni Houthis , Iraqi militia, and Hamas . The average annual budget reserved for the funding of Iran's proxies is estimated at US$1.6 billion. According to Syrian opposition sources, starting from the beginning of 2011, Iran allocated a total of US$50 billion to maintain the Bashar al-Assad regime in Syria . However, this investment proved to be a failure following the eventual collapse of the regime in late 2024.

The most costly of Iran's defense expenditures is its nuclear program. The estimated total cost of Iran's nuclear program until 2025 approaches US$500 billion. As a result of its nuclear program, Iran is subject to international sanctions, causing a long-term economic stagnation which cost Iran an additional US$1.2 trillion over 12 years. Furthermore, the sanctions led to a significant decline in foreign direct investments (FDI), with Iran experiencing a reduction of approximately 80% in FDI between 2011 and 2021.

Inflation in Iran has been persistently high since the revolution, eroding living standards. During 1960–1978, Iran's inflation was usually in single digits, but after 1979 it surged into double digits almost every year. From 1979 to 2024, consumer prices increased astronomically – an item that cost 100 rials in 1960 costs over 2 million rials by 2025. The average inflation rate since 1979 has been about 17–18% per year, compared to under 10% before 1979. Periodic bouts of very high inflation occurred: in the 1980s during the war and money-printing, inflation topped 20–30%. In the 1990s, it spiked above 50% (in 1995). Tightening measures brought inflation down to ~10% by the early 2000s, but it accelerated again later. International sanctions on Iran's oil and banking (especially 2012 and 2018 onward) led to currency devaluation and shortages, driving inflation to 30–50% annually in 2018–2023. By 2023–2024, Iran's annual inflation was roughly 40%, particularly elevated for food prices, which led to steep declines in real incomes. In 2025, amid renewed sanctions and war disruption, the IMF raised Iran's projected inflation to over 43%, placing Iran as the 4th-highest inflation country globally (after Venezuela , Sudan , Zimbabwe ). The latest data shows that the annual inflation rate reached 38.7% in May 2025. Due to the high inflation and the devaluation of the Iranian real (90% since 2018) have brought the Iran's parliament to approve a bill in committee that paves the way to remove four zeros from the national currency, the rial, in an effort to tackle long-term inflation. However, experts say that while cutting zeros from the currency may have some benefits, it does not offer a clear solution to Iran's deeper economic problems.

In August 2025, Iran effectively raised taxation by introducing a new law making inflation partly taxable framing it as a tool against hoarding in a country where inflation often exceeds 40 percent.

As of April 2026, the IMF forecasts that the inflation in Iran will hit 69%.

Iran had an estimated $110 billion in foreign reserves in 2011 and balances its external payments by pricing oil at approximately $75 per barrel. As of 2013, only $30 to $50 billion of those reserves are accessible because of current sanctions. Iranian media has questioned the reason behind Iran's government non-repatriation of its foreign reserves before the imposition of the latest round of sanctions and its failure to convert into gold . As a consequence, the Iranian rial lost more than 40% of its value between December 2011 and April 2012.

Iran's external and fiscal accounts reflect falling oil prices in FY 2012, but remain in surplus. The current account was expected to reach a surplus of 2.1% of GDP in FY 2012, and the net fiscal balance (after payments to Iran's National Development Fund ) will register a surplus of 0.3% of GDP. In 2013 the external debts stood at $7.2 billion down from $17.3 billion in 2012. Overall fiscal deficit is expected to deteriorate to 2.7% of GDP in FY 2016 from 1.7% in 2015. Money in circulation reached $700 billion in March 2020 (based on the 2017 pre-devaluation exchange rate ), thus furthering the decline of the Iranian rial and rise in inflation.

The Iranian rial has continually lost value, especially since the 2010s. The currency was roughly 70 rials per US dollar before 1979; after the revolution and war, it fell to ~1,700 rials/USD by 1990s, and kept sliding. Following the U.S. withdrawal from the nuclear deal (2018) and sanctions, the rial's decline accelerated: the free-market exchange rate crossed 300,000 rials/USD in 2020, then 600,000 by late 2022, and hit 1,000,000 rials per USD in early 2025 – a psychological milestone of 1 million. Authorities periodically attempted currency reforms, e.g., banning exchange shops, unifying rates, or proposing to cut four zeros from the currency, but the underlying pressures of limited foreign exchange and excess money supply have kept the rial weak. By 2025, Iran's currency and inflation problems were severe enough that even basic goods saw rapid price rises, sparking protests over living costs. Subsidy reforms led to jumps in prices of staples like bread and medicine.

Transparency International defines corruption as the "abuse of entrusted power for personal gain". Its annual Corruption Perceptions Index evaluates perceived corruption in the public sector of many countries (182 in 2025) on a "combination of at least 3 data sources drawn from 13 different corruption surveys and assessments. ... collected by a variety of reputable institutions, including the World Bank and the World Economic Forum ". The 2025 Index scored Iran at 23 on a scale from 0 ("highly corrupt") to 100 ("very clean") where 42 was the global average. The country perceived to be least corrupt (Denmark) scored 89, and the two perceived most corrupt (Somalia and South Sudan) scored 9. Regionally, the average score among Middle Eastern and North African countries was 39. The best score in the region was 69 (the United Arab Emirates) and the worst scores were 12 (Libya and Yemen).

Since the current version of the Corruption Perceptions Index was introduced in 2012, Iran's score has steadily declined from its high point of 30 in 2017 to its lowest-ever scores of 23 in 2024 and 2025. Its score in the World Bank 's Worldwide Governance Indicators has also declined, from 33.42/100 in 2018 to 29.75/100 in 2024.

Iran's stock market, the Tehran Stock Exchange (TSE) , has experienced boom-and-bust cycles in recent years, often moving opposite to the real economy. During recessions and currency devaluation, many Iranians invested in stocks as a hedge against inflation, fueling speculative rallies. In 2019–2020, amid U.S. " maximum pressure " sanctions and a recession, the TSE index surged by over 500% within a year. By late 2020 and into 2021, the bubble burst – the market crashed over 30% from its peak by early 2021, wiping out many small investors' savings. Allegations emerged that government insiders had benefited from selling at highs, causing public mistrust.

Structural issues, such as lack of market depth, high inflation, and political risks, continue to make Iran's stock market volatile. Following the war, analysts argued that without genuine government support (e.g. large capital injections like those used to stabilize the currency), the market downturn could deepen, as the war's aftermath and ongoing sanctions deter both local and foreign investors.

Following the conclusion of hostilities with Iraq , the Government declared its intention to privatize most industries and to liberalize and decentralize the economy. Sale of state-owned companies proceeded slowly, mainly due to opposition by a nationalist majority in the parliament. In 2006, most industries, some 70% of the economy, remained state-owned. The majority of heavy industries including steel, petrochemicals, copper, automobiles, and machine tools remained in the public sector, with most light industry privately owned.

Since Article 44 has never been strictly enforced, the private sector has played a much larger role than that outlined in the constitution. In recent years, the role of this sector has increased. A 2004 constitutional amendment allows 80% of state assets to be privatized. Forty percent of such sales are to be conducted through the " Justice Shares " scheme and the rest through the Tehran Stock Exchange . The government would retain the remaining 20%.

In 2005 government assets were estimated at $120 billion. Some $63 billion of such assets were privatized from 2005 to 2010, reducing the government's direct share of GDP from 80% to 40%. [ citation needed ] Many companies in Iran remain uncompetitive because of mismanagement over the years, thus making privatization less attractive for potential investors. According to then-President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , 60% of Iran's wealth is controlled by just 300 people .

The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) are thought to control about one third of Iran's economy through subsidiaries and trusts. 2007 estimates by the Los Angeles Times suggest the IRGC has ties to over one hundred companies and annual revenue in excess of $12 billion, particularly in construction. The Ministry of Petroleum awarded the IRGC billions of dollars in no-bid contracts as well as major infrastructure projects.

Tasked with border control, the IRGC maintains a monopoly on smuggling , costing Iranian companies billions of dollars each year. Smuggling is encouraged in part by the generous subsidization of domestic goods , including fuel . The IRGC also runs the telecommunication company , laser eye-surgery clinics, makes cars, builds bridges and roads and develops oil and gas fields.

Welfare programs for the needy are managed by more than 30 public agencies alongside semi-state organizations known as bonyads , together with several private non-governmental organizations. Bonyads are a consortium of over 120 tax-exempt organizations that receive subsidies and religious donations. They answer directly to the Supreme Leader of Iran and control over 20% of GDP. Operating everything from vast soybean and cotton farms to hotels, soft drink, automobile manufacturing, and shipping lines, they are seen as overstaffed, corrupt and generally unprofitable.

Bonyad companies compete with Iran's unprotected private sector, whose firms complain of the difficulty of competing with the subsidized bonyads . Bonyads are not subject to audit or Iran's accounting laws . Setad is a multi-sector business organization, with holdings of 37 companies, and an estimated value of $95 billion. It is under the control of the Supreme Leader, Mojtaba Khamenei , and created from thousands of properties confiscated from Iranians .

After the revolution the government established a national education system that improved adult literacy rates. In 2008, 85% of the adult population was literate, well ahead of the regional average of 62%. The Human Development Index was 0.749 in 2013, placing Iran in the "high human development" bracket.

In 2008 annual economic growth of above 5% was necessary to absorb the 750,000 new labor force entrants each year. In 2020, agriculture was 10% of GDP and employed 16% of the labor force. In 2017, the industrial sector , which includes mining, manufacturing, and construction, was 35% of GDP and employed 35% of the labor force. In 2009, mineral products, notably petroleum , accounted for 80% of Iran's export revenues, even though mining employs less than 1% of the labor force.

In 2004 the service sector ranked as the largest contributor to GDP, at 48% of the economy, and employed 44% of workers. Women made up 33% of the labor force in 2005. Youth unemployment, aged 15–24, was 29.1% in 2012, resulting in significant brain drain . In 2016, according to the government, some 40% of the workforce in the public sector are either in excess or incompetent.

As of 2025 Iran has a population 92.4M , of which 71M are 15 years old or above. Out of a population of 71M, 29,521,716  (67.2% of males and 14% of female) participated in the labor force (either as workers or unemployed), or 41% of the population in the ages 15+. The unemployment rate in 2025 was 8.3% (2,450,302 people), and the unemployment rate among the young (ages 15-24) reached to 21.9%. Moreover, as of April 2026 more than a million people lost their jobs due the war with USA and Israel .

The Islamic Republic of Iran employs around 8 million individuals, of whom roughly 3 million hold formal positions within the three branches of government, the armed forces, and leadership institutions. These roles encompass bureaucratic staff, civil servants, and uniformed military personnel.

Beyond the formal government structure, approximately 2.3 million individuals are employed in quasi-governmental organizations, including state-owned enterprises, national banks, municipalities, and the Islamic Azad University . Additionally, about 2.5 million pensioners receive state stipends, often distributed through the Relief Committee, a government-controlled charitable organization. As a result, nearly one in ten Iranian citizens maintain a regular financial connection to the state.

Unemployment in Iran has remained at high single digits officially, but underemployment and joblessness among youth are significant concerns. However, this headline figure masks labor force dropout: over 38 million working-age Iranians (especially women and youth) are economically inactive, and only 25 million were employed, indicating a very low labor participation rate  (around 41%). Youth unemployment is much higher: for ages 18–35 it was around 15%, and for 15–24 year-olds about 20% in 2024–25 (with young women's jobless rate even higher, near 35%).

Iran is classed as a middle income country and has made significant progress in provision of health and education services in the period covered by the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). In 2010, Iran's average monthly income was about $500. The GNI per capita in 2012 was $13,000, by PPP . A minimum national wage applies to each sector of activity as defined by the Supreme Labor Council. In 2009 this was about $263 per month ($3,156 per year).

In 2001 some 20% of household consumption was spent on food, 32% on fuel, 12% on health care and 8% on education. In 2015, Iranians had little personal debt . In 2007, seventy percent of Iranians owned their homes .

In 2018–2019 the median household income of Iran was 434,905,000 rials (slightl $3,300), an 18.6% rise from 2017 to 2018, when median household income was about 366,700,000 rials. [ citation needed ] Adjusted for purchasing power parity , Iran's 2017–2018 median income was equivalent to about $28,647 (2017 conversion factor, private consumption, LCU).

As the average Iranian household size is 3.5, this puts median personal income at around $8,185. While Iran rates relatively well on income, median wealth is very low for its income level, on par with Vietnam or Djibouti, indicating a high level of spending. According to SCI, median household spending in 2018 was 393,227,000 rials, or 90.5% of the median household income of 434,905,000 rials. [ citation needed ]

After the 1979 revolution, the composition of the middle class in Iran did not change significantly, but its size doubled from about 15% of the population in 1979 to more than 32% in 2000. In 2008, the official poverty line in Tehran for 2008 was $9,612. The national average poverty line was $4,932. In 2010, Iran's Department of Statistics announced that 10 million Iranians live under the absolute poverty line and 30 million live under the relative poverty line .

Salaries and wages in Iran have not kept up with inflation, causing a steep decline in real purchasing power. The government sets a national minimum wage annually through the Supreme Labor Council. In March 2024, the minimum monthly wage was raised by 35% to 11,107,000 rials (about \$185 at the time, including certain benefits). However, due to rapid rial depreciation, by late 2024 that amount was worth only ~$137, while the cost of living spiked causing a real decrease of wages. Labor organizations note the minimum wage that once covered roughly half of a family's basic expenses now covers only one-quarter or less of essential costs.

According the inequality dataset of the World Bank , in 2002 the Gini index in Iran was 34.8, a level that is considered to be quite modest. However, closer data analysis reveals significant wealth concentration, with the top 10% of earners holding 52.7% of the national income – a larger share than in the United States or European countries .

Iran's Gini coefficient fell from ~0.50 in the late 1970s to ~0.40 by the mid-1980s. In the 2000s, inequality fluctuated around a Gini index of 0.38–0.40. In the late 2010s and 2020s, some official data suggested a slight decline in the Gini (possibly due to overall economic contraction hitting higher incomes). The World Bank estimated Iran's Gini index at around 36.0 in 2019, improving to 34.8 in 2022  (on a 0–100 scale where higher is more unequal).

Poverty levels in Iran have risen in recent years amid sanctions and inflation, after some improvements in the 2000s. The Research Center of Iran's Parliament reported that poverty reached 30.1% of the population in 2023, up from about 26% in 2018, meaning around 25–27 million people unable to meet basic needs. Over 5 years, the poverty rate hovered around 30%, indicating persistent hardship. The World Bank estimated that in 2018, only 0.5% of Iranians lived on under $1.90/day (extreme poverty), but by 2021 the share living under the upper-middle-income country poverty line (~$6.85/day) had increased sharply due to inflation. By March 2022, Iranian media reported over 32 million people (around 38% of the population) were below the poverty line when considering the ability to afford essential food and housing, as inflation in food prices outpaced incomes.

Malnutrition in Iran has been reported as a growing social and economic issue amid the country's ongoing economic crisis. In August 2025, the Iranian newspaper Shargh , citing surveys conducted by NGOs and volunteer groups, highlighted severe deficiencies in food access and nutrition, particularly protein intake, across the population. The study revealed that only 1.7% of households reported daily protein consumption. About 27% of households reported no protein intake at all. Among households with temporary employment, over 93% consumed protein less than once a week or not at all. In unemployed households, this figure rose to 95%.

Although Iran does not offer universal social protection, in 1996, the Iranian Center for Statistics estimated that more than 73% of the Iranian population was covered by social security. Membership of the social security system for all employees is compulsory. Social security ensures employee protection against unemployment, disease, old age and occupational accidents. In 2003, the government began to consolidate its welfare organizations to eliminate redundancy and inefficiency. In 2003 the minimum standard pension was 50% of the worker's earnings but no less than the minimum wage. Iran spent 22.5% of its 2003 national budget on social welfare programs of which more than 50% covered pension costs. Out of the 15,000 homeless in Iran in 2015, 5,000 were women .

Although Iranian workers have a theoretical right to form labor unions, there is no union system in the country. Ostensible worker representation is provided by the Workers' House , a state-sponsored institution that attempts to challenge some state policies. Guild unions operate locally in most areas, but are limited largely to issuing credentials and licenses. The right to strike is generally not respected by the state. Since 1979 strikes have often been met by police action.

Agriculture contributes 9.5% to the gross domestic product and employs 17% of the labor force. About 9% of Iran's land is arable, with the main food-producing areas located in the Caspian region and in northwestern valleys. Some northern and western areas support rain-fed agriculture, while others require irrigation . Primitive farming methods, overworked and under-fertilized soil, poor seed and water scarcity are the principal obstacles to increased production. About one third of total cultivated land is irrigated. Construction of multipurpose dams and reservoirs along rivers in the Zagros and Alborz mountains have increased the amount of water available for irrigation. Agricultural production is increasing as a result of modernization, mechanization, improvements to crops and livestock as well as land redistribution programs.

Wheat, the most important crop, is grown mainly in the west and northwest. Rice is the major crop in the Caspian region. Other crops include barley, corn, cotton, sugar beets, tea, hemp, tobacco, fruits, potatoes, legumes (beans and lentils), vegetables, fodder plants (alfalfa and clover), almonds, walnuts and spices including cumin and sumac . Iran is the world's largest producer of saffron , pistachios , honey , berberis and berries and the second largest dates producer. Meat and dairy products include lamb, goat meat, beef, poultry, milk, eggs, butter, and cheese.

Non-food products include wool, leather, and silk. Forestry products from the northern slopes of the Alborz Mountains are economically important. Tree-cutting is strictly controlled by the government, which also runs a reforestation program. Rivers drain into the Caspian Sea and are fished for salmon, carp, trout, pike, and sturgeon that produce caviar , of which Iran is the largest producer.

Since the 1979 revolution, commercial farming has replaced subsistence farming as the dominant mode of agricultural production. By 1997, the gross value reached $25 billion. Iran is 90% self-sufficient in essential agricultural products, although limited rice production leads to substantial imports. In 2007 Iran reached self-sufficiency in wheat production and for the first time became a net wheat exporter. By 2003, a quarter of Iran's non-oil exports were of agricultural products, including fresh and dried fruits, nuts, animal hides, processed foods, and spices. Iran exported $736 million worth of foodstuffs in 2007 and $1 billion (~600,000 tonnes) in 2010. A total of 12,198 entities are engaged in the Iranian food industry , or 12% of all entities in the industry sector . The sector also employs approximately 328,000 people or 16.1% of the
entire industry sector's workforce.

The fishing industry in Iran is regulated by the Iran Fisheries Organization (Shilat), focusing on marine capture, aquaculture, and stock enhancement, with key operations in the Persian Gulf and Caspian Sea and major regional fishing hubs in Hormozgan and Chabahar. Exports bring in hundreds of millions of dollars, with tens of thousands of tons of seafood shipped out yearly. Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in the Persian Gulf is an acute problem.

Animal husbandry in Iran accounts for around 30% of direct agricultural employment, featuring key sectors such as sheep, dairy and poultry production. It traces back thousands of years as a core pillar of the rural and tribal economy. The poultry industry is Iran's second-largest industry next to oil. In 2012, Iran's poultry industry produced approximately 2 billion birds. Poultry production has grown significantly over the past few decades, with output rising from 195,000 tons in 1978 to 2.1 million tons in 2012.

Large-scale factory manufacturing began in the 1920s. With the help from the Soviet Union and the United States , Iran's domestic capabilities expanded to include heavy industries such as iron and steel, machinery tools, agricultural tractors, communications equipment, vehicles assembly and petrochemical products. During the Iran–Iraq War , Iraq bombed many of Iran's petrochemical plants , damaging the large oil refinery at Abadan bringing production to a halt. Reconstruction began in 1988 and production resumed in 1993. In spite of the war, many small factories sprang up to produce import-substitution goods and materials needed by the military. [ citation needed ]

Iran's major manufactured products are petrochemicals, steel and copper products. Other important manufactures include automobiles, home and electric appliances, telecommunications equipment, cement and industrial machinery. Iran operates the largest operational population of industrial robots in West Asia. Other products include paper, rubber products, processed foods, leather products and pharmaceuticals . In 2000, textile mills , using domestic cotton and wool such as Tehran Patou and Iran Termeh employed around 400,000 people around Tehran, Isfahan and along the Caspian coast.

Despite these problems, Iran has progressed in various scientific and technological fields , including petrochemical , pharmaceutical , aerospace , defense , and heavy industry . Even in the face of economic sanctions , Iran is emerging as an industrialized country .

Iran has a long tradition of producing artisanal goods including Persian carpets , ceramics , copperware, brassware, glass, leather goods, textiles and wooden artifacts. The country's carpet-weaving tradition dates from pre-Islamic times and remains an important industry contributing substantial amounts to rural incomes. An estimated 1.2 million weavers in Iran produce carpets for domestic and international export markets. [ citation needed ] More than $500 million worth of hand-woven carpets are exported each year, accounting for 30% of the 2008 world market. Around 5.2 million people work in some 250 handicraft fields and contribute 3% of GDP. [ citation needed ]

As of 2001, 13 public and privately owned automakers within Iran, led by Iran Khodro and SAIPA that accounted for 94% of domestic production. Iran Khodro's Paykan , replaced by the Samand in 2005, is the predominant brand. With 61% of the 2001 market, Khodro was the largest player, whilst Saipa contributed 33% that year. Other car manufacturers, such as the Bahman Group , Kerman Motors, Kish Khodro , Raniran, Traktorsazi, Shahab Khodro and others accounted for the remaining 6%.

These automakers produce a wide range of vehicles including motorbikes, passenger cars such as Saipa's Tiba , vans, mini trucks, medium-sized trucks, heavy trucks, minibuses, large buses and other heavy automobiles used for commercial and private activities in the country. In 2009 Iran ranked fifth in car production growth after China, Taiwan, Romania and India. Iran was the world's 12th biggest automaker in 2010 and operates a fleet of 11.5 million cars. Iran produced 1,395,421 cars in 2010, including 35,901 commercial vehicles. [ citation needed ]

In 2007 the International Institute for Strategic Studies estimated Iran's defense budget at $7.31 billion, equivalent to 2.6% of GDP or $102 per capita, ranking it 25th internationally. The country's defense industry manufactures many types of arms and equipment. Since 1992, Iran's Defense Industries Organization (DIO) has produced its own tanks, armored personnel carriers, guided missiles , radar systems, guided missile destroyers, military vessels, submarines and fighter planes. In 2006 Iran exported weapons to 57 countries, including NATO members, and exports reached $100 million. It has also developed a sophisticated mobile air defense system dubbed as Bavar 373 .

Until the early 1950s construction remained in the hands of small domestic companies. Increased income from oil and gas and easy credit triggered a building boom that attracted international construction firms to the country. This growth continued until the mid-1970s when a sharp rise in inflation and a credit squeeze collapsed the boom. The construction industry had revived somewhat by the mid-1980s, although housing shortages and speculation remained serious problems, especially in large urban centers. As of January 2011, the banking sector , particularly Bank Maskan , had loaned up to 102 trillion rials ($10.2 billion) to applicants of Mehr housing scheme . Construction is one of the most important sectors accounting for 20–50% of total private investment in urban areas and was one of the prime investment targets of well-off Iranians.

Annual turnover amounted to $38.4 billion in 2005 and $32.8 billion in 2011. Because of poor construction quality, many buildings need seismic reinforcement or renovation. Iran has a large dam building industry .

Mineral production contributed 0.6% of the country's GDP in 2011, [ citation needed ] a figure that increases to 4% when mining-related industries are included. Gating factors include poor infrastructure, legal barriers, exploration difficulties, and government control over all resources. Iran is ranked among the world's 15 major mineral-rich countries.

Although the petroleum industry provides the majority of revenue, about 75% of all mining sector employees work in mines producing minerals other than oil and natural gas. These include coal, iron ore, copper, lead, zinc, chromium, barite , salt, gypsum , molybdenum , strontium , silica , uranium, and gold, the latter of which is mainly a by-product of the Sar Cheshmeh copper complex operation. The mine at Sar Cheshmeh in Kerman Province is home to the world's second largest store of copper. Large iron ore deposits exist in central Iran, near Bafq, Yazd and Kerman. The government owns 90% of all mines and related industries and is seeking foreign investment. The sector accounts for 3% of exports.

In 2019, the country was the 2nd largest world producer of gypsum ; the 8th largest world producer of molybdenum ; the world's 8th largest producer of antimony ; the 11th largest world producer of iron ore; the 18th largest world producer of sulfur , in addition to being the 21st largest worldwide producer of salt . It was the 13th largest producer in the world of uranium in 2018.

Iran has recoverable coal reserves of nearly 1.9 billion short tonnes . By mid-2008, the country produced about 1.3 million short tonnes of coal annually and consumed about 1.5 million short tonnes, making it a net importer. The country plans to increase hard-coal production to 5 million tons in 2012 from 2 million tons in November 2008.

Iran's steel industry is a major global producer, featuring key hubs such as Mobarakeh Steel and Khuzestan Steel . The main steel mills are located in Ahvaz, Isfahan and Khuzestan . Iran became self-sufficient in steel in 2009. Aluminum and copper production are projected to hit 245,000 and 383,000 tons respectively by March 2009. Cement production reached 65 million tons in 2009, exporting to 40 countries.

Iran manufactures 60–70% of its equipment domestically, including refineries, oil tankers, drilling rigs, offshore platforms, and exploration instruments.

Based on a fertilizer plant in Shiraz , the world's largest ethylene unit, in Asalouyeh , and the completion of other special economic zone projects , Iran's exports in petrochemicals reached $5.5 billion in 2007, $9 billion in 2008 and $7.6 billion during the first ten months of the Iranian calendar year 2010. National Petrochemical Company 's output capacity will increase to over 100 million tpa by 2015 from an estimated 50 million tpa in 2010 thus becoming the world' second largest chemical producer globally after Dow Chemical with Iran housing some of the world's largest chemical complexes.

Major refineries located at Abadan (site of its first refinery), Kermanshah and Tehran failed to meet domestic demand for gasoline in 2009. Iran's refining industry requires $15 billion in investment over the period 2007–2012 to become self-sufficient and end gasoline imports. Iran has the fifth cheapest gasoline prices in the world leading to fuel smuggling with neighboring countries .

In November 2019, Iran raised the gasoline prices by 50% and imposed a strict rationing system again, as in 2007. The prices per liter gasoline rose to 15,000 rials, where only 60 liters were permitted to private cars for a month. Besides, oil purchase beyond the limit would cost 30,000 rials per liter. Those prices are still well below target prices set in the subsidy reform plan , however. The policy changes came in effect to the US sanctions , and caused protests across the country. The result of the rationing, a year later, was reduced pollution and wasteful domestic consumption and increase in exports.

Energy Electricity:

Electricity – production by source:

Oil:

Natural gas:

Iran possesses 10% of the world's proven oil reserves and 15% of its gas reserves . Domestic oil and gas along with hydroelectric power facilities provide electical power for its nationwide grids. Energy wastage in Iran amounts to six or seven billion dollars per year, much higher than the international norm. Iran recycles 28% of its used oil and gas, whereas some other countries reprocess up to 60%. In 2008 Iran paid $84 billion in subsidies for oil, gas and electricity . It is the world's third largest consumer of natural gas after United States and Russia. In 2010 Iran completed its first nuclear power plant at Bushehr with Russian assistance.

Iran has been a major oil exporter since 1913. The country's major oil fields lie in the central and southwestern parts of the western Zagros mountains. Oil is also found in northern Iran and in the Persian Gulf . In 1978, Iran was the fourth largest oil producer, OPEC 's second largest oil producer and second largest exporter. Following the 1979 revolution the new government reduced production. A further decline in production occurred as result of damage to oil facilities during the Iraq-Iran war.

Oil production rose in the late 1980s as pipelines were repaired and new Persian Gulf fields exploited. By 2004, annual oil production reached 1.4 billion barrels producing a net profit of $50 billion. Iranian Central Bank data show a declining trend in the share of Iranian exports from oil-products (FY 2006: 84.9%, 2007/2008: 86.5%, 2008/2009: 85.5%, 2009/2010: 79.8%, FY 2010 (first three-quarters): 78.9%). Iranian officials estimate that Iran's annual oil and gas revenues could reach $250 billion by 2015 once current projects come on stream.

Pipelines move oil from the fields to the refineries and to such exporting ports as Abadan, Bandar-e Mashur and Kharg Island . Since 1997, Iran's state-owned oil and gas industry has entered into major exploration and production agreements with foreign consortiums . In 2008 the Iranian Oil Bourse (IOB) was inaugurated in Kish Island . The IOB trades petroleum, petrochemicals and gas in various currencies. Trading is primarily in the euro and rial along with other major currencies, not including the US dollar . [ citation needed ] According to the Petroleum Ministry , Iran plans to invest $500 billion in its oil sector by 2025.

As of August 2025 the crude oil price declined by 15.44% since August 2024. In addition, the International Energy Agency (IEA) says global demand in 2025 is expected to grow by less than 700,000 barrels per day (bpd), while supply is set to rise by 2.5 million bpd— resulting in a surplus of more than 1.8 million bpd and consequently, a further decline in oil price is expected. The decline of oil price is expected to further aggravate Iran's economic situation since Iran is heavily dependent on Chinese refiners that take advantage on Iran's difficulties to sell oil in the global markets.

Despite 1990s efforts towards economic liberalization, government spending, including expenditure by quasi-governmental foundations, remains high. Estimates of service sector spending in Iran are regularly more than two-fifths of GDP, much government-related, including military expenditures, government salaries, and social security disbursements. Urbanization contributed to service sector growth. Important service industries include public services (including education), commerce, personal services, professional services and tourism.

The total value of transport and communications is expected to rise to $46 billion in nominal terms by 2013, representing 6.8% of Iran's GDP. Projections based on 1996 employment figures compiled for the International Labour Organization suggest that Iran's transport and communications sector employed 3.4 million people, or 20.5% of the labor force in 2008.

Iran's retail industry consists largely of cooperatives (many of them government-sponsored ), and independent retailers operating in bazaars . The bulk of food sales occur at street markets with prices set by the Chief Statistics Bureau. Iran has 438,478 small grocery retailers. These are especially popular in cities other than Tehran where the number of hypermarkets and supermarkets is still very limited. More mini-markets and supermarkets are emerging, mostly independent operations. The biggest chainstores are state-owned Etka, Refah , Shahrvand and Hyperstar Market . Electronic commerce in Iran passed the $1 billion mark in 2009.

In 2012, Iranians spent $77 billion on food, $22 billion on clothes and $18.5 billion on outward tourism . In 2015, overall consumer spending and disposable income are projected at $176.4 billion and $287 billion respectively.

Education in Iran is centralized and divided into K-12 education plus higher education . Elementary and secondary education is supervised by the Ministry of Education and higher education is under the supervision of Ministry of Science, Research and Technology and Ministry of Health and Medical Education for medical sciences. As of 2016, around 94% of the Iranian adult population is literate. This rate increases to 97% among young adults ages between 15 and 24 without any gender consideration. By 2007, Iran had a student-to- workforce population ratio of 10.2%, standing among the countries with the highest ratio in the world.

Primary school ( Dabestân , دبستان ) starts at the age of 6 for a duration of six years. Junior high school ( Dore-ye Avval-e Dabirestân دوره اول دبیرستان ), also known as middle school, includes three years of Dabirestân from the seventh to the ninth grade. Senior high school ( Dore-ye Dovom-e Dabirestân , دوره دوم دبیرستان ), including the last three years, is mandatory. The student at this level can study theoretical, vocational/technical, or manual fields, each program with its specialties. Ultimately, students are given a high school diploma . The requirement to enter into higher education is to have a high school diploma, and passing the national university entrance examination, Iranian University Entrance Exam ( Konkur کنکور ), which is similar to the French baccalauréat exam (for most of universities and fields of study). Iran suffers from a problem of over education and falsified academic degrees.

Universities , institutes of technology , medical schools and community colleges provide the higher education. Higher education is sectioned by different levels of diplomas: Fogh-e-Diplom or Kārdāni after two years of higher education, Kārshenāsi (also known under the name "license") is delivered after four years of higher education ( bachelor's degree ). Kārshenāsi-ye Arshad is delivered after two more years of study ( master's degree ). After which, another exam allows the candidate to pursue a doctoral program ( Ph.D. ).

The Human Rights Measurement Initiative (HRMI) finds that Iran is fulfilling only 91.0% of what it should fulfill for the right to education based on the country's income level. HRMI breaks down the right to education by examining the rights to both primary and secondary education. While considering Iran's income level, the nation is achieving 99.2% of what should be possible based on its resources (income) for primary education but only 82.9% for secondary education.

The constitution entitles Iranians to basic universal health care. By 2008, 73% of Iranians were covered by the voluntary national health insurance system. Although over 85% of the population use an insurance system to cover their drug expenses, the government heavily subsidizes pharmaceutical production/importation. The total market value of Iran's health and medical sector was $24 billion in 2002 and was forecast to rise to $50 billion by 2013. Iran's pharmaceutical industry is a major domestic sector producing roughly 95% of the country's medicine supply, characterized by high generic self-sufficiency and localized biopharmaceutical growth. In 2006, 55 pharmaceutical companies in Iran produced 96% (quantitatively) of the medicines for a market worth $1.2 billion. Major firms such as Darou Pakhsh , Sobhan Darou and Cinnagen handle large-scale generic formulations alongside advanced biosimilars for immunology, cancers and chronic conditions. This figure is projected to increase to $3.65 billion by 2013.

According to Hataminia, S., & Mohammadzadeh Asl, N. (2025), the deteriorating economic indicator of Iran especially, inflation and unemployment rates exert significant negative effects on life expectancy.

Although tourism declined significantly during the war with Iraq, it has subsequently recovered. About 1,659,000 foreign tourists visited Iran in 2004 and 2.3 million in 2009 mostly from Asian countries, including the republics of Central Asia, while about 10% came from the European Union and North America.

The most popular tourist destinations are Mazandaran , Isfahan , Mashhad and Shiraz . In the early 2000s the industry faced serious limitations in infrastructure, communications, industry standards and personnel training. Several organized tours from Germany, France and other European countries come to Iran annually to visit archaeological sites and monuments. In 2003 Iran ranked 68th in tourism revenues worldwide. According to UNESCO and the deputy head of research for Iran Travel and Tourism Organization (ITTO) , Iran is rated among the "10 most touristic countries in the world". Domestic tourism in Iran is one of the largest in the world.

Government loans and credits are available to industrial and agricultural projects, primarily through banks. Iran's unit of currency is the rial which had an average official exchange rate of 9,326 rials to the U.S. dollar in 2007. Rials are exchanged on the unofficial market at a higher rate. In 1979, the government nationalized private banks. The restructured banking system replaced interest on loans with handling fees, in accordance with Islamic law . This system took effect in the mid-1980s.

The banking system consists of a central bank, the Bank Markazi , which issues currency and oversees all state and private banks , as well as the Organization of Islamic Economics which acts as a sort of central bank for issuing Qard al-Hasan , as a parallel system in the banking sector, operating outside the purview of the Central Bank. It supervises 1200, out of 2500 Islamic loan funds, on behalf of Iran's Central Bank. Several commercial banks have branches throughout the country. Two development banks exist and a housing bank specializes in home mortgages. The government began to privatize the banking sector in 2001 when licenses were issued to two new privately owned banks.

State-owned commercial banks predominantly make loans to the state, bonyad enterprises, large-scale private firms and four thousand wealthy/connected individuals. While most Iranians have difficulty obtaining small home loans, 90 individuals secured facilities totaling $8 billion. [ citation needed ] In 2009, Iran's General Inspection Office announced that Iranian banks held some $38 billion of delinquent loans, with capital of only $20 billion. [ citation needed ]

Foreign transactions with Iran amounted to $150 billion of major contracts between 2000 and 2007, including private and government lines of credit. In 2007, Iran had $62 billion in assets abroad. In 2010, Iran attracted almost $11.9 billion from abroad, of which $3.6 billion was FDI , $7.4 billion was from international commercial bank loans, and around $900 million consisted of loans and projects from international development banks.

As of 2010, the Tehran Stock Exchange traded the shares of more than 330 registered companies. Listed companies were valued at $100 billion in 2011.

Insurance premiums accounted for just under 1% of GDP in 2008, a figure partly attributable to low average income per head. Five state-owned insurance firms dominate the market, four of which are active in commercial insurance. The leading player is the Iran Insurance Company, followed by Asia, Alborz and Dana insurances. In 2001/02 third-party liability insurance accounted for 46% of premiums, followed by health insurance (13%), fire insurance (10%) and life insurance (9.9%).

Broadcast media, including five national radio stations and five national television networks as well as dozens of local radio and television stations are run by the government. In 2008, there were 345 telephone lines and 106 personal computers for every 1,000 residents. Personal computers for home use became more affordable in the mid-1990s, since when demand for Internet access has increased rapidly. As of 2010, Iran also had the world's third largest number of bloggers (2010).

In 1998, the Ministry of Post, Telegraph & Telephone, later renamed the Ministry of Information & Communication Technology , began selling Internet accounts to the general public. In 2006, revenues from the Iranian telecom industry were estimated at $1.2 billion. In 2006, Iran had 1,223 Internet Service Providers (ISPs), all private sector operated. As of 2014, Iran has the largest mobile market in the Middle East, with 83.2 million mobile subscriptions and 8 million smart-phones in 2012.

According to the World Bank, Iran's information and communications technology sector had a 1.4% share of GDP in 2008. Around 150,000 people work in this sector, including 20,000 in the software industry. 1,200 IT companies were registered in 2002, 200 in software development. In 2014 software exports stood at $400 million. [ citation needed ] By the end of 2009, Iran's telecom market was the fourth-largest in the Middle East at $9.2 billion and was expected to reach $12.9 billion by 2014 at a compound annual growth rate of 6.9%. [ citation needed ]

Iran has an extensive paved road system linking most towns and all cities. In 2011, the country had 173,000 kilometres (107,000 mi) of roads, of which 73% were paved. In 2007 there were approximately 100 passenger cars for every 1,000 inhabitants. Trains operated on 11,106 kilometres (6,901 mi) of track.

Iran's major port of entry is Bandar-Abbas on the Strait of Hormuz . After arriving in Iran, imported goods are distributed by trucks and freight trains. The Tehran–Bandar-Abbas railroad, opened in 1995, connects Bandar-Abbas to Central Asia via Tehran and Mashhad . Other major ports include Bandar Anzali and Bandar Torkaman on the Caspian Sea and Khoramshahr and Bandar Imam Khomeini on the Persian Gulf .

Dozens of cities have passenger and cargo airports. Iran Air , the national airline, was founded in 1962 and operates domestic and international flights. All large cities have bus transit systems and private companies provide intercity bus services. Tehran, Mashhad, Shiraz , Tabriz , Ahvaz and Isfahan are constructing underground railways. More than one million people work in the transportation sector, accounting for 9% of 2008 GDP.

In August 2022, President Ebrahim Raisi 's cabinet approved a law to import fully assembled foreign cars. His predecessor President Hassan Rouhani , had outlawed such imports in July 2018 due to sanctions imposed on Iran . Regular Iranian citizens were unable to buy safe cars at affordable prices.

Water supply and sanitation in Iran is overseen by the Ministry of Energy , which sets policy and supervises the  provision of services. The renewable water per capita in 2025 for each Iranian has decreased to less than 500 cubic meters per year, whereas this figure was previously 1,500 cubic meters.

Iran is a founding member of the OPEC cartel and the Organization of Gas Exporting Countries . Petroleum constitutes 56% of Iran's exports with a value of $60.2 billion in 2018. For the first time, the value of Iran's non-oil exports is expected to reach the value of imports at $43 billion in 2011. Pistachios , liquefied propane, methanol (methyl alcohol), hand-woven carpets and automobiles are the major non-oil exports. Copper , cement , leather , textiles , fruits , saffron and caviar are also export items of Iran.

Technical and engineering service exports in FY 2007 were $2.7 billion of which 40% of technical services went to Central Asia and the Caucasus, 30% ($350 million) to Iraq, and close to 20% ($205 million) to Africa.

Iranian firms have developed energy, pipelines, irrigation, dams and power generation in different countries. The country has made non-oil exports a priority by expanding its broad industrial base, educated and motivated workforce and favorable location, which gives it proximity to an estimated market of some 300 million people in Caspian , Persian Gulf and some ECO countries further east.

Total import volume rose by 189% from $13.7 billion in 2000 to $39.7 billion in 2005 and $55.189 billion in 2009. Iran's major commercial partners are China , France , Germany , India , Italy , Japan , Russia , and South Korea . From 1950 until 1978, the United States was Iran's foremost economic and military partner, playing a major role in infrastructure and industry modernization. It is reported that around 80% of machinery and equipment in Iran is of German origin. In March 2018, Iran had banned Dollar in trade. In July 2018, France, Germany and the UK agreed to continue trade with Iran without using Dollar as a medium of exchange.

Since the mid-1990s, Iran has increased its economic cooperation with other developing countries in " South–South integration " including Syria , India, China , South Africa , Cuba , and Venezuela . Iran's trade with India passed $13 billion in 2007, an 80% increase within a year. [ citation needed ] Iran is expanding its trade ties with Turkey and Pakistan and shares with its partners the common objective to create a common market in West and Central Asia through ECO . [ citation needed ]

Since 2003, Iran has increased investment in neighboring countries such as Iraq and Afghanistan. In Dubai , UAE , it is estimated that Iranian expatriates handle over 20% of its domestic economy and account for an equal proportion of its population. Migrant Iranian workers abroad remitted less than $2 billion home in 2006. Between 2005 and 2009, trade between Dubai and Iran tripled to $12 billion; money invested in the local real estate market and import-export businesses, collectively known as the Bazaar , and geared towards providing Iran and other countries with required consumer goods. It is estimated that one third of Iran's imported goods and exports are delivered through the black market , underground economy, and illegal jetties, thus damaging the economy .

Iran had an estimated $110 billion in foreign reserves in 2011 and balances its external payments by pricing oil at approximately $75 per barrel. As of 2013, only $30 to $50 billion of those reserves are accessible because of current sanctions. Iranian media has questioned the reason behind Iran's government non-repatriation of its foreign reserves before the imposition of the latest round of sanctions and its failure to convert into gold . As a consequence, the Iranian rial lost more than 40% of its value between December 2011 and April 2012.

The current account was expected to reach a surplus of 2.1% of GDP in FY 2012, and the net fiscal balance (after payments to Iran's National Development Fund ) will register a surplus of 0.3% of GDP. In 2013 the external debts stood at $7.2 billion down from $17.3 billion in 2012. Overall fiscal deficit is expected to deteriorate to 2.7% of GDP in FY 2016 from 1.7% in 2015.

Money in circulation reached $700 billion in March 2020 (based on the 2017 pre-devaluation exchange rate ), thus furthering the decline of the Iranian rial and rise in inflation.

In the 1990s and early 2000s, indirect oilfield development agreements were made with foreign firms, including buyback contracts in the oil sector whereby the contractor provided project finance in return for an allocated production share. Operation transferred to National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) after a set number of years, completing the contract.

Unfavorable or complex operating requirements and international sanctions have hindered foreign investment in the country, despite liberalization of relevant regulations in the early 2000s. Iran absorbed $24.3 billion of foreign investment between the Iranian calendar years 1993 and 2007. The EIU estimates that Iran's net FDI will rise by 100% between 2010 and 2014.

Foreign investors concentrated their activities in the energy, vehicle manufacture, copper mining, construction, utilities, petrochemicals, clothing, food and beverages, telecom and pharmaceuticals sectors. Iran is a member of the World Bank's Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency . In 2006, the combined net worth of Iranian citizens abroad was about 1.3 trillion dollars.

According to the head of the Organization for Investment, Economic and Technical Assistance of Iran (OIETAI) , in 2008 Iran ranked 142 among 181 countries in working conditions. Iran stands at number 96 in terms of business start-ups, 165 in obtaining permits, 147 in employment, 147 in asset registration, 84 in obtaining credit, 164 in legal support for investments, 104 in tax payments, 142 in overseas trade, 56 in contract feasibility and 107 in bankruptcy. Firms from over 50 countries invested in Iran between 1992 and 2008, with Asia and Europe the largest participants as shown below:

The economic impact of a partial lifting of sanctions extends beyond the energy sector; The New York Times reported that "consumer-oriented companies, in particular, could find opportunity in this country with 81 million consumers, many of whom are young and prefer Western products". The consumer-goods market is expected to grow by $100 billion by 2020.

In 2015, Iran was considered "a strong emerging market play" by investment and trading firms. Opening Iran's market place to foreign investment could also be a boon to competitive multinational firms operating in a variety of manufacturing and service sectors, worth $600 billion to $800 billion in new investment opportunities over the next decade.

In the 2000s, during high oil prices, Iran's central bank built up reserves well above $100 billion. However, sanctions after 2012 cut Iran's access to much of its money (funds accumulated from oil sales in countries like China, India, South Korea were locked or could only be used for limited purchases). In 2018, when the U.S. reimposed banking sanctions, Iran's usable reserves shrank dramatically – at one point in 2020, the IMF estimated Iran had as little as $4 billion in accessible reserves (excluding gold and illiquid assets). After 2021, higher oil exports to China allowed some rebuilding of reserves. By late 2024, Iran's total international reserves (including gold and deposits abroad) were estimated at $26 billion, rising to a projected $34 billion in 2025 as per IMF data – though not all of that is readily deployable.

Lack of reserve access has contributed to Iran's currency volatility; the central bank has limited ability to intervene in the open market with dollars or euros. In late 2023, a deal with the U.S. allowed Iran to repatriate about $6 billion of its funds from South Korea (in exchange for a prisoner release), but those funds were designated for humanitarian trade only. Iran's oil export revenue (mostly in yuan from China) is partly kept offshore to finance imports from those countries.

Facing this, the Central Bank of Iran has tried tactics like currency swap agreements with allies, efforts to ditch the U.S. dollar in trade (using barter or currencies like yuan/rouble), and even reportedly buying cryptocurrencies as alternative reserve assets. In 2022, the bank also raised interest rates and banned private exchange trading for a period to slow capital flight. Yet capital flight persisted – an estimated $14 billion left Iran in 2024 and $20 billion in 2023 as people sought safer assets abroad, reflecting low confidence in the rial.

After the Iranian Revolution in 1979, the United States ended its economic and diplomatic ties with Iran , banned Iranian oil imports and froze approximately $11 billion of its assets. In 1996, the U.S. Government passed the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA) which prohibits U.S. (and non-U.S.) companies from investing and trading with Iran in amounts of more than $20 million annually. Since 2000 exceptions to this restriction have been made for items including pharmaceuticals and medical equipment .

Iran's nuclear program has been the subject of contention with the West since 2006 over suspicions of its intentions. The UN Security Council imposed sanctions against select companies linked to the nuclear program, thus furthering the country's economic isolation . Sanctions notably bar nuclear, missile and many military exports to Iran and target investments in oil, gas and petrochemicals , exports of refined petroleum products, as well as the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps , banks, insurance , financial transactions and shipping .

In 2012, the European Union tightened its own sanctions by joining the three-decade-old US oil embargo against Iran . In 2015, Iran and the P5+1 reached a deal on the nuclear program that will remove the main sanctions by early 2016. Even though Iran can trade in its own currency some problems subsist mainly due to the fact that it cannot transact in US dollars freely. Given its large reserves of oil and gas, the Iranian rial could become a world reserve currency if parity is established with oil and gas . [ citation needed ]

In 2018, the United States government unilaterally withdrew from the JCPOA agreement and re-imposed its sanctions on Iran's oil sales , petrochemicals , shipping , metals trading and banking transactions .

According to U.S. Undersecretary of State William J. Burns , Iran may be losing as much as $60 billion annually in energy investment. Sanctions are making imports 24% more costly on average. In addition, the latest round of sanctions could cost Iran annually $50 billion in lost oil revenues . Iran is increasingly using barter trade because its access to the international dollar payment system has been denied. According to Iranian officials, large-scale withdrawal by international companies represents an "opportunity" for domestic companies to replace them.

The IEA estimated that Iranian exports fell to a record of 860,000 bpd in September 2012 from 2.2 million bpd at the end of 2011. This fall led to a drop in revenues and clashes on the streets of Tehran when the local currency, the rial , collapsed. September 2012 output was Iran's lowest since 1988.

The economic impacts of sanctions have been severe. Based on research, the sanctions resulted in welfare losses across all income groups in Iran, with wealthier groups suffering greater losses compared to poorer groups. Additionally, income concentration and share within top income groups declined post-sanctions.

According to the U.S. Iran could reduce the world price of crude petroleum by 10%, saving the United States annually $76 billion (at the proximate 2008 world oil price of $100/bbl).

According to NIAC , sanctions cost the United States over $175 billion in lost trade and 279,000 lost job opportunities. Between 2010 and 2012, sanctions cost the E.U. states more than twice as much as the United States in terms of lost trade revenue. Germany was hit the hardest, losing between $23.1 and $73.0 billion between 2010 and 2012, with Italy and France following at $13.6–$42.8 billion and $10.9–$34.2 billion respectively.

GDP growth turned negative in 2013 (−5%). The unofficial unemployment rate was 20% by mid-2012. Oil exports dropped to 1.4 million bpd in 2014 from 2.5 million bpd in 2011. By 2013, Iran had $80 billion in foreign exchange reserves frozen overseas . Automobile production declined 40% between 2011 and 2013. According to the U.S. government in 2015, Iran's economy has reached a point where it is "fundamentally incapable of recovery" without a nuclear accommodation with the West.

The tentative rapprochement between Iran and the US , which began in the second half of 2013, has the potential to become a world-changing development, and unleash tremendous geopolitical and economic opportunities , if it is sustained […] if Iran and the US were to achieve a diplomatic breakthrough, geopolitical tensions in the Middle East could decline sharply, and Iran could come to be perceived as a promising emerging market in its own right.

In January 2019, President Hassan Rouhani blamed the US for Iran's declining economy. Following the US pullout from an international nuclear deal with Iran and re-imposed sanctions, Iran faced the toughest economic situation in 40 years. According to Majlis , this has caused damages estimated between 150 and 200 billion dollars to the Iranian economy.

In August 2024, an Iranian group called IRLeaks attacked Iranian banks. Politico described the attack as the "worst cyberattack" in Iranian history. According to Politico, the Iranian government was forced to pay millions of dollars to IRLeaks in ransom. Politico reported that 20 out of about 29 Iranian credit institutions fell in the attack. The Iranian supreme leader blamed Israel and the United States without mentioning the cyberattack on the banking system. Politico remarked it was plausible Israel or the US were involved because of tensions with Israel as well as the Americans having accused Iran of intervening in the American 2024 elections. Politico also remarked that the group was made of freelance hackers and the attack was likely carried out for monetary gain. TechCentral said the attack was probably carried out by freelance hackers. An Iranian firm paid the hackers no less than $3 million to stop the attack and retrieve data.

The Iranian regime spent more than US$9 billion on Iran's nuclear program over the last three decades. The efforts to develop the nuclear program were accompanied by threats to destroy Israel , which resulted in heavy sanctions that were imposed on Iran and consequently, heavy indirect cost. The indirect cost of the nuclear program are estimated to be US$3 trillion. Iran lost more than US$450 billion in oil revenues, more than US$100 billion in lost of foreign investment, and the Iranian Rial has been devaluated in more than 95%.

Much of the investment was evaporated as a result of Twelve-Day War , which resulted in a destruction of large parts of Iran's nuclear program, including the destruction of facilities like the nuclear facilities in Natanz and Fordow as well as assassination of nuclear scientists.

Articles

Books

Governments

Papers

Brazil is the world's second largest producer of ethanol fuel . Brazil and the United States have led the industrial production of ethanol fuel for several years, together accounting for 85 percent of the world's production in 2017. Brazil produced 26.72 billion liters (7.06 billion U.S. liquid gallons ), representing 26.1 percent of the world's total ethanol used as fuel in 2017.

Between 2006 and 2008, Brazil was considered to have the world's first "sustainable" biofuels economy and the biofuel industry leader, a policy model for other countries; and its sugarcane ethanol "the most successful alternative fuel to date." However, some authors consider that the successful Brazilian ethanol model is sustainable only in Brazil due to its advanced agri-industrial technology and its enormous amount of arable land available; while according to other authors it is a solution only for some countries in the tropical zone of Latin America , the Caribbean , and Africa . In recent years however, later-generation biofuels have sprung up which use crops that are explicitly grown for fuel production and are not suitable for use as food.

Brazil's 40-year-old ethanol fuel program is based on the most efficient agricultural technology for sugarcane cultivation in the world, uses modern equipment and cheap sugar cane as feedstock, the residual cane-waste ( bagasse ) is used to produce heat and power, which results in a very competitive price and also in a high energy balance (output energy/input energy), which varies from 8.3 for average conditions to 10.2 for best practice production. In 2010, the U.S. EPA designated Brazilian sugarcane ethanol as an advanced biofuel due to its 61% reduction of total life cycle greenhouse gas emissions , including direct indirect land use change emissions .

There are no longer any light vehicles in Brazil running on pure gasoline. Since 1976 the government made it mandatory to blend anhydrous ethanol with gasoline, fluctuating between 10% and 22%. and requiring just a minor adjustment on regular gasoline engines. In 1993 the mandatory blend was fixed by law at 22% anhydrous ethanol ( E22 ) by volume in the entire country, but with leeway to the Executive to set different percentages of ethanol within pre-established boundaries. In 2003 these limits were set at a minimum of 20% and a maximum of 25%. Since July 1, 2007, the mandatory blend is 25% of anhydrous ethanol and 75% gasoline or E25 blend . The lower limit was reduced to 18% in April 2011 due to recurring ethanol supply shortages and high prices that take place between harvest seasons. By mid March 2015 the government temporarily raised the ethanol blend in regular gasoline from 25% to 27%.

The Brazilian car manufacturing industry developed flexible-fuel vehicles that can run on any proportion of gasoline ( E20-E25 blend ) and hydrous ethanol ( E100 ). Introduced in the market in 2003, flex vehicles became a commercial success, dominating the passenger vehicle market with a 94% market share of all new cars and light vehicles sold in 2013. By mid-2010 there were 70 flex models available in the market, and as of December 2013 [ update ] , a total of 15 car manufacturers produce flex-fuel engines, dominating all light vehicle segments except sports cars, off-road vehicles and minivans. The cumulative production of flex-fuel cars and light commercial vehicles reached the milestone of 10 million vehicles in March 2010, and the 20 million-unit milestone was reached in June 2013. As of June 2015 [ update ] , flex-fuel light-duty vehicle cumulative sales totaled 25.5 million units, and production of flex motorcycles totaled 4 million in March 2015.

The success of "flex" vehicles, together with the mandatory E25 blend throughout the country, allowed ethanol fuel consumption in the country to achieve a 50% market share of the gasoline-powered fleet in February 2008. In terms of energy equivalent , sugarcane ethanol represented 17.6% of the country's total energy consumption by the transport sector in 2008.

Sugarcane has been cultivated in Brazil since 1532 as sugar was one of the first commodities exported to Europe by the Portuguese settlers. The first use of sugarcane ethanol as a fuel in Brazil dates back to the late 1920s and early 1930s, with the introduction of the automobile in the country. Ethanol fuel production peaked during World War II and, as German submarine attacks threatened oil supplies, the mandatory blend became as high as 50% in 1943. After the end of the war cheap oil caused gasoline to prevail, and ethanol blends were only used sporadically, mostly to take advantage of sugar surpluses, until the seventies, when the first oil crisis resulted in gasoline shortages and awareness of the dangers of oil dependence. As a response to this crisis, the Brazilian government began promoting bioethanol as a fuel. The National Alcohol Program - Pró-Álcool - ( Portuguese : Programa Nacional do Álcool ), launched in 1975, was a nationwide program financed by the government to phase out automobile fuels derived from fossil fuels , such as gasoline, in favor of ethanol produced from sugar cane .

The first phase of the program concentrated on production of anhydrous ethanol for blending with gasoline . The Brazilian government made mandatory the blending of ethanol fuel with gasoline, fluctuating from 1976 until 1992 between 10% and 22%. Due to this mandatory minimum gasoline blend, pure gasoline ( E0 ) is no longer sold in the country. A federal law was passed in October 1993 establishing a mandatory blend of 22% anhydrous ethanol ( E22 ) in the entire country. This law also authorized the Executive to set different percentages of ethanol within pre-established boundaries; and since 2003 these limits were fixed at a maximum of 25% ( E25 ) and a minimum of 20% ( E20 ) by volume. Since then, the government has set the percentage of the ethanol blend according to the results of the sugarcane harvest and the levels of ethanol production from sugarcane, resulting in blend variations even within the same year.

Since July 2007 the mandatory blend is 25% of anhydrous ethanol and 75% gasoline or E25 blend . However, in 2010, and as a result of supply concerns and high ethanol fuel prices, the government mandated a temporary 90-day blend reduction from E25 to E20 beginning February 1, 2010. By mid March 2015 the government raised temporarily the ethanol blend in regular gasoline from 25% to 27%. The blend on premium gasoline was kept at 25% upon request by ANFAVEA, the Brazilian association of automakers, because of concerns about the effects on the higher blend on cars that were built for E25, as opposed to flex-fuel cars. The government approved the higher blend as an economic incentive for ethanol producers, due to an existing overstock of over 1 billion liters (264 million US gallons) of ethanol. The implementation of E27 is expected to allow the consumption of the overstock before the end of 2015.

After testing in government fleets with several prototypes developed by the local carmakers, and compelled by the second oil crisis , the Fiat 147 , the first modern commercial neat ethanol car ( E100 only ) was launched to the market in July 1979. The Brazilian government provided three important initial drivers for the ethanol industry: guaranteed purchases by the state-owned oil company Petrobras , low-interest loans for agro-industrial ethanol firms, and fixed gasoline and ethanol prices where hydrous ethanol sold for 59% of the government-set gasoline price at the pump. Subsidising ethanol production in this manner and setting an artificially low price established ethanol as an alternative to gasoline.

After reaching more than 4 million cars and light trucks running on pure ethanol by the late 1980s, representing one-third of the country's motor vehicle fleet, ethanol production and sales of ethanol-only cars tumbled due to several factors. First, gasoline prices fell sharply as a result of the 1980s oil glut , but mainly because of a shortage of ethanol fuel supply in the local market left thousands of vehicles in line at gas stations or out of fuel in their garages by mid-1989. As supply could not keep pace with the increasing demand required by the now significant ethanol-only fleet, the Brazilian government began importing ethanol in 1991. Since 1979 until December 2010 neat ethanol vehicles totaled 5.7 million units. The number of neat ethanol vehicles still in use was estimated between 2 and 3 million vehicles by 2003, and estimated at 1.22 million as of December 2011 [ update ] .

Confidence on ethanol-powered vehicles was restored only with the introduction in the Brazilian market of flexible-fuel vehicles . In March 2003 Volkswagen launched in the Brazilian market the Gol 1.6 Total Flex, the first commercial flexible-fuel vehicle capable of running on any blend of gasoline and ethanol. By 2010 manufacturers that build flexible fuel vehicles include Chevrolet , Fiat , Ford , Peugeot , Renault , Volkswagen , Honda , Mitsubishi , Toyota , Citroën , Nissan , and Kia Motors . In 2013, Ford launched the first flex fuel car with direct injection: the Focus 2.0 Duratec Direct Flex.

Flexible fuel cars were 22% of the car sales in 2004, 73% in 2005, 87.6% in July 2008, and reached a record 94% in August 2009. The cumulative production of flex-fuel cars and light commercial vehicles reached the milestone of 10 million vehicles in March 2010, and 15 million in January 2012. Registrations of flex-fuel cars and light trucks represented 87.0% of all passenger and light duty vehicles sold in the country in 2012. Production passed the 20 million-unit mark in June 2013. By the end of 2014, flex-fuel cars represented 54% of the Brazilian registered stock of light-duty vehicles, while gasoline only vehicles represented 34.3%. As of June 2015 [ update ] , flex-fuel light-duty vehicle cumulative sales totaled 25.5 million units.

The rapid adoption and commercial success of "flex" vehicles, as they are popularly known, together with the mandatory blend of alcohol with gasoline as E25 fuel , have increased ethanol consumption up to the point that by February 2008 a landmark in ethanol consumption was achieved when ethanol retail sales surpassed the 50% market share of the gasoline-powered fleet. This level of ethanol fuel consumption had not been reached since the end of the 1980s, at the peak of the Pró-Álcool Program.

Under the auspices of the BioEthanol for Sustainable Transport (BEST) project, the first ethanol-powered ( ED95 ) bus began operations in São Paulo city in December 2007 as a one-year trial project. A second ED95 trial bus began operating in São Paulo city in November 2009. Based on the satisfactory results obtained during the 3-year trial operation of the two buses, in November 2010 the municipal government of São Paulo city signed an agreement with UNICA , Cosan , Scania and Viação Metropolitana ", the local bus operator, to introduced a fleet of 50 ethanol-powered ED95 buses by May 2011. The local government objective is for the city's entire bus fleet, which is made of 15,000 diesel-powered buses, to use only renewable fuels by 2018. The first ethanol-powered buses were delivered in May 2011, and the 50 ethanol-powered ED95 buses are scheduled to begin regular service in São Paulo in June 2011.

Another innovation of the Brazilian flexible-fuel technology was the development of flex-fuel motorcycles . The first flex motorcycle was launched by Honda in March 2009. Produced by its Brazilian subsidiary Moto Honda da Amazônia, the CG 150 Titan Mix is sold for around US$2,700. In order to avoid cold start problems, the fuel tank must have at least 20% of gasoline at temperatures below 15 °C (59 °F). In September 2009, Honda launched a second flexible-fuel motorcycle, the on-off road NXR 150 Bros Mix . By December 2010 both Honda flexible-fuel motorcycles had reached cumulative sales of 515,726 units, representing an 18.1% market share of the Brazilian new motorcycle sales in 2010. Two other flex-fuel motorcycles manufactured by Honda were launched in October 2010 and January 2011, the CG 150 FAN and the Honda BIZ 125 Flex. During 2011 a total of 956,117 flex-fuel motorcycles were produced, raising its market share to 56.7%. Production reached the  2 million mark in August 2012. Flexible-fuel motorcycle production passed the 3 million-unit milestone in October 2013, and the 4 million mark in March 2015.

Ethanol production in Brazil uses sugarcane as feedstock and relies on first-generation technologies based on the use of the sucrose content of sugarcane. Ethanol yield has grown 3.77% per year since 1975 and productivity gains have been based on improvements in the agricultural and industrial phases of the production process. Further improvements on best practices are expected to allow in the short to mid-term an average ethanol productivity of 9,000 liters per hectare .

There were 378 ethanol plants operating in Brazil by July 2008, 126 dedicated to ethanol production and 252 producing both sugar and ethanol. There are 15 additional plants dedicated exclusively to sugar production. These plants have an installed capacity of crushing 538 million metric tons of sugarcane per year, and there are 25 plants under construction expected to be on line by 2009 that will add an additional capacity of crushing 50 million tons of sugarcane per year. The typical plant costs approximately US$150 million and requires a nearby sugarcane plantation of 30,000 hectares.

Ethanol production is concentrated in the Central and Southeast regions of the country, led by São Paulo state , with around 60% of the country's total ethanol production, followed by Paraná (8%), Minas Gerais (8%) and Goiás (5%). These two regions have been responsible for 90% of Brazil's ethanol production since 2005 and the harvest season goes from April to November. The Northeast Region is responsible for the remaining 10% of ethanol production, led by Alagoas with 2% of total production. The harvest season in the North-Northeast region goes from September to March, and the average productivity in this region is lower than the South-Central region. Due to the difference in the two main harvest seasons, Brazilian statistics for sugar and ethanol production are commonly reported on a harvest two-year basis rather than on a calendar year. [ citation needed ]

For the 2008/09 harvest it is expected that about 44% of the sugarcane will be used for sugar, 1% for alcoholic beverages , and 55% for ethanol production. An estimate of between 24.9 billion litres (6.58 billion U.S. liquid gallons ) and 27.1 billion litres (7.16 billion gallons) of ethanol are expected to be produced in 2008/09 harvest year, with most of the production being destined for the internal market, and only 4.2 billion liters (1.1 billion gallons) for exports, with an estimated 2.5 billion liters (660 million gallons) destined for the US market. Sugarcane cultivated area grew from 7 million to 7.8 million hectares of land from 2007 to 2008, mainly using abandoned pasture lands. In 2008 Brazil has 276 million hectares of arable land, 72% use for pasture, 16.9% for grain crops, and 2.8% for sugarcane, meaning that ethanol is just requiring approximately 1.5% of all arable land available in the country.

As sugar and ethanol share the same feedstock and their industrial processing is fully integrated, formal employment statistics are usually presented together. In 2000 there were 642,848 workers employed by these industries, and as ethanol production expanded, by 2005 there were 982,604 workers employed in the sugarcane cultivation and industrialization, including 414,668 workers in the sugarcane fields, 439,573 workers in the sugar mills, and 128,363 workers in the ethanol distilleries. While employment in the ethanol distilleries grew 88.4% from 2000 to 2005, employment in the sugar fields just grew 16.2% as a direct result of expansion of mechanical harvest instead manual harvesting, which avoids burning the sugarcane fields before manual cutting and also increases productivity. The states with the most employment in 2005 were São Paulo (39.2%), Pernambuco (15%), Alagoas (14.1%), Paraná (7%), and Minas Gerais (5.6%).

Since 2009 the Brazilian ethanol industry has experienced a crisis due to multiple causes. They include the 2008 financial crisis ; poor sugarcane harvests due to unfavorable weather; high sugar prices in the world market that made more attractive to produce sugar rather than ethanol; a freeze imposed by the Brazilian government on the petrol and diesel prices. Brazilian ethanol fuel production in 2011 was 21.1 billion liters (5.6 billion U.S. liquid gallons), down from 26.2 billion liters (6.9 billion gallons) in 2010, while in 2012 the production of ethanol was 26% lower than in 2008. By 2012 a total of 41 ethanol plants out of about 400 have closed and the sugar-cane crop yields dropped from 115 tonnes per hectare in 2008 to 69 tonnes per hectare in 2012.

A supply shortage took place for several months during 2010 and 2011, and prices climbed to the point that ethanol fuel was no longer attractive for owners of flex-fuel vehicles; the government reduced the minimum ethanol blend in gasoline to reduce demand and keep ethanol fuel prices from rising further; and for the first time since the 1990s, (corn) ethanol fuel was imported from the United States. The imports totaled around 1.5 billion litres in 2011–2012. The ethanol share in the transport fuel market decreased from 55% in 2008 to 35% in 2012. As a result of higher ethanol prices combined with government subsidies to keep gasoline price lower than the international market value, by November 2013 only 23% flex-fuel car owners were using ethanol regularly, down from 66% in 2009.

During 2014 Brazil produced  23.4 billion liters (6.19 billion U.S. liquid gallons) of ethanol fuel, however, during that year Brazil imported ethanol from the United States, ranking as the second largest U.S. export market in 2014 after Canada, and representing about 13% of total American exports. Production recovered since 2015, and Brazil produced 26.72 billion liters (7.06 billion U.S. liquid gallons ) in 2017, representing 26.1 percent of the world's total ethanol used as fuel.

A key aspect for the development of the ethanol industry in Brazil was the investment in agricultural research and development by both the public and private sector. The work of EMBRAPA , the state-owned company in charge for applied research on agriculture, together with research developed by state institutes and universities, especially in the State of São Paulo, have allowed Brazil to become a major innovator in the fields of biotechnology and agronomic practices, resulting in the most efficient agricultural technology for sugarcane cultivation in the world. Efforts have been concentrated in increasing the efficiency of inputs and processes to optimize output per hectare of feedstock, and the result has been a threefold increase of sugarcane yields in 29 years, as Brazilian average ethanol yields went from 2,024 liters per ha in 1975 to 5,917 liters per ha in 2004; allowing the efficiency of ethanol production to grow at a rate of 3.77% per year. Brazilian biotechnologies include the development of sugarcane varieties that have a larger sugar or energy content, one of the main drivers for high yields of ethanol per unit of planted area. The increase of the index total recoverable sugar (TRS) from sugarcane has been very significant, 1.5% per year in the period 1977 to 2004, resulting in an increase from 95 to 140 kg/ha. Innovations in the industrial process have allowed an increase in sugar extraction in the period 1977 to 2003. The average annual improvement was 0.3%; some mills have already reached extraction efficiencies of 98%.

Biotechnology research and genetic improvement have led to the development of strains that are more resistant to disease, bacteria, and pests, and also have the capacity to respond to different environments, thus allowing the expansion of sugarcane cultivation to areas previously considered inadequate for such cultures. By 2008 more than 500 sugarcane varieties are cultivated in Brazil, and 51 of them were released just during the last ten years. Four research programs, two private and two public, are devoted to further genetic improvement. Since the mid nineties, Brazilian biotechnology laboratories have developed transgenic varieties, still non commerciallized. Identification of 40,000 cane genes was completed in 2003 and there are a couple dozen research groups working on the functional genome , still on the experimental phase, but commercial results are expected within five years.

Also, there is ongoing research regarding sugarcane biological nitrogen fixation, with the most promising plant varieties showing yields three times the national average in soils of very low fertility, thus avoiding nitrogenous fertilization. There is also research for the development of second-generation or cellulosic ethanol . In São Paulo state an increase of 12% in sugar cane yield and 6.4% in sugar content is expected over the next decade. This advance combined with an expected 6.2% improvement in fermentation efficiency and 2% in sugar extraction, may increase ethanol yields by 29%, raising average ethanol productivity to 9,000 liters/ha. Approximately US$50 million has recently been allocated for research and projects focused on advancing the obtention of ethanol from sugarcane in São Paulo state.

Sucrose extracted from sugarcane accounts for little more than 30% of the chemical energy stored in the harvested parts of the mature plant; 35% is in the leaves and stem tips, which are left in the fields during harvest, and 35% are in the fibrous material ( bagasse ) left over from pressing. Most of the industrial processing of sugarcane in Brazil is done through a very integrated production chain, allowing sugar production, industrial ethanol processing, and electricity generation from byproducts. The typical steps for large-scale production of sugar and ethanol include milling , electricity generation , fermentation , distillation of ethanol, and dehydration . [ citation needed ]

Once harvested, sugarcane is usually transported to the plant by semi-trailer trucks . After quality control , sugarcane is washed, chopped, and shredded by revolving knives; the feedstock is fed to and extracted by a set of mill combinations to collect a juice, called garapa in Brazil, that contain 10–15% sucrose, and bagasse , the fiber residue. The main objective of the milling process is to extract the largest possible amount of sucrose from the cane, and a secondary but important objective is the production of bagasse with a low moisture content as boiler fuel, as bagasse is burned for electricity generation (see below ), allowing the plant to be self-sufficient in energy and to generate electricity for the local power grid. The cane juice or garapa is then filtered and treated by chemicals and pasteurized . Before evaporation , the juice is filtered once again, producing vinasse , a fluid rich in organic compounds. The syrup resulting from evaporation is then precipitated by crystallization producing a mixture of clear crystals surrounded by molasses . A centrifuge is used to separate the sugar from molasses, and the crystals are washed by addition of steam, after which the crystals are dried by an airflow. Upon cooling, sugar crystallizes out of the syrup. From this point, the sugar refining process continues to produce different grades of sugar, and the molasses continue a separate process to produce ethanol. [ citation needed ]

The resulting molasses are treated to become a sterilized molasse free of impurities, ready to be fermented. In the fermentation process sugars are transformed into ethanol by addition of yeast . Fermentation time varies from four to twelve hours resulting in an alcohol content of 7–10% by total volume ( °GL ), called fermented wine. The yeast is recovered from this wine through a centrifuge. Making use of the different boiling points the alcohol in the fermented wine is separated from the main resting solid components. The remaining product is hydrated ethanol with a concentration of 96°GL, the highest concentration of ethanol that can be achieved via azeotropic distillation , and by national specification can contain up to 4.9% of water by volume. This hydrous ethanol is the fuel used by ethanol-only and flex vehicles in the country. Further dehydration is normally done by addition of chemicals, up to the specified 99.7°GL in order to produce anhydrous ethanol, which is used for blending with pure gasoline to obtain the country's E25 mandatory blend. The additional processing required to convert hydrated into anhydrous ethanol increases the cost of the fuel, as in 2007 the average producer price difference between the two was around 14% for São Paulo State. This production price difference, though small, contributes to the competitiveness of the hydrated ethanol ( E100 ) used in Brazil, not only with regard to local gasoline prices but also as compared to other countries such as the United States and Sweden , that only use anhydrous ethanol for their flex fuel fleet.

Since the early days, bagasse was burnt in the plant to provide the energy required for the industrial part of the process. Today, the Brazilian best practice uses high-pressure boilers that increases energy recovery , allowing most sugar-ethanol plants to be energetically self-sufficient and even sell surplus electricity to utilities. By 2000, the total amount of sugarcane bagasse produced per year was 50 million tons/ dry basis out of more than 300 million tons of harvested sugarcane. Several authors estimated a potential power generation from the use of sugarcane bagasse ranging from 1,000 to 9,000 MW , depending on the technology used and the use of harvest trash. One utility in São Paulo is buying more than 1% of its electricity from sugar mills, with a production capacity of 600 MW for self-use and 100 MW for sale. According to analysis from Frost & Sullivan, Brazil's sugarcane bagasse used for power generation has reached 3.0 GW in 2007, and it is expected to reach 12.2 GW in 2014. The analysis also found that sugarcane bagasse cogeneration accounts for 3% of the total Brazilian energy matrix. The energy is especially valuable to utilities because it is produced mainly in the dry season when hydroelectric dams are running low.

According to a study commissioned by the Dutch government in 2006 to evaluate the sustainability of Brazilian bioethanol "there are also substantial gains possible in the efficiency of electricity use and generation: The electricity used for distillery operations has been estimated at 12.9 kWh/tonne cane, with a best available technology rate of 9.6 kWh/tonne cane. For electricity generation the efficiency could be increased from 18 kWh/tonne cane presently, to 29.1 kWh/tonne cane maximum. The production of surplus electricity could in theory be increased from 5.3 kWh/tonne cane to 19 kWh/tonne cane."

Brazil has several experimental programs for the production of electricity using sugar cane ethanol as fuel. A joint venture of General Electric and Petrobras is operating one commercial pilot plant in Juiz de Fora , Minas Gerais .

Energy-use associated with the production of sugarcane ethanol derives from three primary sources: the agricultural sector, the industrial sector, and the distribution sector. In the agricultural sector, 35.98 GJ of energy are used to plant, maintain, and harvest one hectare (10,000 m 2 ) of sugarcane for usable biofuel. This includes energy from numerous inputs, including nitrogen, phosphate, potassium oxide, lime, seed, herbicides, insecticides, labor and diesel fuel. The industrial sector, which includes the milling and refining sugarcane and the production of ethanol fuel, uses 3.63 GJ of energy and generates 155.57 GJ of energy per hectare of sugarcane plantation. Scientists estimate that the potential power generated from the cogeneration of bagasse could range from 1,000 to 9,000 MW, depending on harvest and technology factors. In Brazil, this is about 3% of the total energy needed. The burning of bagasse can generate 18 kilowatt-hours, or 64.7 MJ per Mg of sugarcane. Distillery facilities require about 45 MJ to operate, leaving a surplus energy supply of 19.3 MJ, or 5.4 kWh. In terms of distribution, researchers calculates sugarcane ethanol's transport energy requirement to be 0.44 GJ per cubic-meter, thus one hectare of land would require 2.82 GJ of energy for successful transport and distribution.  After taking all three sectors into account, the EROEI (Energy Return over Energy Invested) for sugarcane ethanol is about 8.

There are several improvements to the industrial processes, such as adopting a hydrolysis process to produce ethanol instead of surplus electricity, or the use of advanced boiler and turbine technology to increase the electricity yield, or a higher use of excess bagasse and harvest trash currently left behind in the fields, that together with various other efficiency improvements in sugarcane farming and the distribution chain have the potential to allow further efficiency increases, translating into higher yields, lower production costs, and also further improvements in the energy balance and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .

Brazil is the world's largest exporter of ethanol. In 2007 it exported 933.4 million gallons (3,532.7 million liters), representing almost 20% of its production, and accounting for almost 50% of the global exports. Since 2004 Brazilian exporters have as their main customers the United States , Netherlands , Japan , Sweden , Jamaica , El Salvador , Costa Rica , Trinidad and Tobago , Nigeria , Mexico , India , and South Korea .

The countries in the Caribbean Basin import relative high quantities of Brazilian ethanol, but not much is destined for domestic consumption. These countries reprocess the product, usually converting Brazilian hydrated ethanol into anhydrous ethanol, and then re-export it to the United States, gaining value-added and avoiding the 2.5% duty and the US$0.54 per gallon tariff , thanks to the trade agreements and benefits granted by Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) . This process is limited by a quota, set at 7% of U.S. ethanol consumption. Although direct U.S. exports fell in 2007, imports from four CBI countries almost doubled, increasing from 15.5% in 2006 to 25.8% in 2007, reflecting increasing re-exports to the U.S., thus partially compensating the loss of Brazilian direct exports to the U.S. This situation has caused some concerns in the United States, as it and Brazil are trying to build a partnership to increase ethanol production in Latin American and the Caribbean. As the U.S. is encouraging "new ethanol production in other countries, production that could directly compete with U.S.-produced ethanol".

The U.S., potentially the largest market for Brazilian ethanol imports, currently imposes a tariff on Brazilian ethanol of US$0.54 per gallon in order to encourage domestic ethanol production and protect the budding ethanol industry in the United States. Historically, this tariff was intended to offset the 45 cent per gallon blender's federal tax credit that is applied to ethanol no matter its country of origin. Exports of Brazilian ethanol to the U.S. reached a total of US$1 billion in 2006, an increase of 1,020% over 2005 (US$98 million), but fell significantly in 2007 due to sharp increases in American ethanol production from corn . As shown in the table, the United States remains the largest single importer of Brazilian ethanol exports, though collectively the European Union and the CBI countries now import a similar amount.

A 2010 study by Iowa State University's Center for Agricultural and Rural Development found that removing the U.S. import tariff would result in less than 5% of the United States' ethanol being imported from Brazil. Also a 2010 study by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) found that the costs to American taxpayers of using a biofuel to reduce gasoline consumption by one gallon are $1.78 for corn ethanol and $3.00 for cellulosic ethanol. In a similar way, and without considering potential indirect land use effects , the costs to taxpayers of reducing greenhouse gas emissions through tax credits are about $750 per metric ton of CO 2 -equivalent for ethanol and around $275 per metric ton for cellulosic ethanol.

After being renewed several times, the tax credit is set to expire on December 31, 2011, and both the US$0.54 per gallon tariff and US$0.45 per gallon blender's credit have been the subject of contentious debate in Washington, D.C., with ethanol interest groups and politicians staking positions on both sides of the issue. On June 16, 2011, the U.S. Congress approved an amendment to the economic development bill to repeal both the tax credit and the tariff on ethanol, and though this bill has an uncertain future, it is considered a signal that the tax credits will not be renew when they expire at the end of 2011. The eventual elimination of the import tariff is not expect to have significant effects in the short term, because the Brazilian ethanol industry has been having trouble meeting its own domestic demand for ethanol during 2010 and 2011, and Brazil imported some corn ethanol from the U.S. The shortage in supply is due in part to high sugar prices, which make it more profitable for Brazilian producers to sell it as sugar than convert it to ethanol fuel. Also, as a result of the credit crunch caused by the 2008 financial crisis , the expansion of the Brazilian ethanol industry has not been able keep up pace with the accelerated growth of the flex fuel fleet .

As U.S. EPA 's 2010 final ruling for the Renewable Fuel Standard designated Brazilian sugarcane ethanol as an advanced biofuel , Brazilian ethanol producers hope this classification will contribute to lift import tariffs both in the U.S. and the rest of the world. Also they expect to increase exports to the U.S., as the blending mandate requires an increasing quota of advanced biofuels, which is not likely to be fulfilled with cellulosic ethanol, and then it would force blenders to import more Brazilian sugarcane-based ethanol, despite the existing 54¢ per gallon tariff on ethanol imported directly from Brazil, or duty-free from the CBI countries that convert Brazilian hydrated ethanol into anhydrous ethanol.

Most automobiles in Brazil run either on hydrous alcohol ( E100 ) or on gasohol ( E25 blend ), as the mixture of 25% anhydrous ethanol with gasoline is mandatory in the entire country. Since 2003, dual-fuel ethanol flex vehicles that run on any proportion of hydrous ethanol and gasoline have been gaining popularity.  These have electronic sensors that detect the type of fuel and adjust the engine combustion to match, so users can choose the cheapest available fuel. Sales of flex fuel vehicles reached 9.3 million by December 2009, representing 39% of the passenger vehicle fleet. By mid-2010 there were 70 flex models available in the market and production by December 2010 reached more than 12.5 million flex vehicles including more than 500 thousand flex fuel motorcycles.

Due to the lower energy content of ethanol fuel, full flex-fuel vehicles get fewer miles per gallon. Ethanol price has to be 25–30% cheaper per gallon to reach the break even point. As a rule of thumb , Brazilian consumers are frequently advised by the media to use more alcohol than gasoline in their mix only when ethanol prices are 30% lower or more than gasoline, as ethanol price fluctuates heavily depending on the harvest yields and seasonal fluctuation of sugarcane harvest.

Since 2005, ethanol prices have been very competitive without subsidies, even with gasoline prices kept constant in local currency since mid-2005, at a time when oil was just approaching US$60 a barrel. However, Brazilian gasoline taxes are high, around 54 percent, while ethanol fuel taxes are lower and vary between 12% and 30%, depending on the state. As of October 2008 the average price of E25 gasoline was $4.39 per gallon while the average price for ethanol was US$2.69 per gallon. This differential in taxation favors ethanol fuel consumption, and by the end of July 2008, when oil prices were close to its latest peak and the Brazilian real exchange rate to the US dollar was close to its most recent minimum, the average gasoline retail price at the pump in Brazil reached US$6.00 per gallon. The price ratio between gasoline and ethanol fuel has been well above 30 percent during this period for most states, except during low sugar cane supply between harvests and for states located far away from the ethanol production centers. According to Brazilian producers, ethanol can remain competitive if the price of oil does not fall below US$30 a barrel.

By 2008 consumption of ethanol fuel by the Brazilian fleet of light vehicles, as pure ethanol and in gasohol, is replacing gasoline at the rate of about 27,000 cubic meters per day, and by February 2008 the combined consumption of anhydrous and hydrated ethanol fuel surpassed 50 percent of the fuel that would be needed to run the light vehicle fleet on pure gasoline alone. Monthly consumption of anhydrous ethanol for the mandatory E25 blend, together with hydrous ethanol used by flex vehicles, reached 1.432 billion liters, while pure gasoline consumption was 1.411 billion liters. Despite this volumetric parity, when expressed in terms of energy equivalent ( toe ), sugarcane ethanol represented 17.6 percent of the country's total energy consumption by the transport sector in 2008, while gasoline represented 23.3 percent and diesel 49.2 percent.

For the first time since 2003 sales of hydrous ethanol fell in 2010, with a decrease of 8.5 percent as compared to 2009. Total consumption of both hydrous and anhydrous ethanol fell by 2.9 percent while gasoline consumption increased by 17.5 percent. Despite the reduction in ethanol consumption, total ethanol sales reached 22.2 billion liters while pure gasoline consumption was 22.7 billion liters, keeping the market share for each fuel close to 50 percent. The decrease in hydrous ethanol consumption was due mainly to high sugar prices in the international markets, which reached a 30-year high in 2010. This peak in sugar prices caused sugarcane processing plants to produce more sugar than ethanol, and as supply contracted, E100 prices increased to the point that several times during 2010 the price of hydrous ethanol was less than 30 percent cheaper than gasoline. Another factor that contributed to this shift was the increase sales of imported gasoline only vehicles that took place during 2010.

Brazil's sugar cane-based industry is more efficient than the U.S. corn-based industry. Sugar cane ethanol has an energy balance seven times greater than ethanol produced from corn. Brazilian distillers are able to produce ethanol for 22 cents per liter, compared with the 30 cents per liter for corn-based ethanol. U.S. corn-derived ethanol costs 30% more because the corn starch must first be converted to sugar before being distilled into alcohol. Despite this cost differential in production, the U.S. did not import more Brazilian ethanol because of U.S. trade barriers corresponding to a tariff of 54-cent per gallon, first imposed in 1980, but kept to offset the 45-cent per gallon blender's federal tax credit that is applied to ethanol no matter its country of origin. In 2011 the U.S. Congress decided not to extend the tariff and the tax credit, and as a result both ended on December 31, 2011. During these three decades the ethanol industry was awarded an estimated US$45 billion in subsidies and US$6 billion just in 2011.

Sugarcane cultivation requires a tropical or subtropical climate, with a minimum of 600 mm (24 in) of annual rainfall. Sugarcane is one of the most efficient photosynthesizers in the plant kingdom, able to convert up to 2% of incident solar energy into biomass. Sugarcane production in the United States occurs in Florida , Louisiana , Hawaii , and Texas . The first three plants to produce sugarcane-based ethanol are expected to go online in Louisiana by mid-2009. Sugar mill plants in Lacassine, St. James and Bunkie were converted to sugar cane-based ethanol production using Colombian technology in order to make possible a profitable ethanol production. These three plants will produce 100 million gallons (378.5 million liters) of ethanol within five years. By 2009 two other sugarcane ethanol production projects are being developed in Kauai , Hawaii and Imperial Valley , California.

In March 2007, "ethanol diplomacy" was the focus of President George W. Bush 's Latin American tour, in which he and Brazil's president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva , were seeking to promote the production and use of sugar cane–based ethanol throughout Latin America and the Caribbean . The two countries also agreed to share technology and set international standards for biofuels. The Brazilian sugar cane technology transfer will permit various Central American countries, such as Honduras , Nicaragua , Costa Rica and Panama , several Caribbean countries, and various Andean Countries tariff-free trade with the U.S. thanks to existing concessionary trade agreements. [ citation needed ]

Even though the U.S. has imposed a US$0.54 tariff on every gallon of imported ethanol since 1980, the Caribbean nations and Central American countries are exempt from such duties based on the benefits granted by the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) . CBI provisions allow tariff-free access to the US market from ethanol produced from foreign feedstock (outside CBI countries) up to 7% of the previous year US consumption. Also additional quotas are allowed if the beneficiary countries produce at least 30% of the ethanol from local feedstocks up to an additional 35 million gallons (132.5 million liters). Thus, several countries have been importing hydrated ethanol from Brazil, processing it at local distilleries to dehydrate it, and then re-exporting it as anhydrous ethanol . American farmers have complained about this loophole to legally bypass the tariff. The 2005 Dominican Republic – Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) maintained the benefits granted by the CBI, and CAFTA provisions established country-specific shares for Costa Rica and El Salvador within the overall quota. An initial annual allowance was established for each country, with gradually increasing annual levels of access to the US market. The expectation is that using Brazilian technology for refining sugar cane–based ethanol, such countries could become net exporters to the United States in the short-term. In August 2007, Brazil's president toured Mexico and several countries in Central America and the Caribbean to promote Brazilian ethanol technology.

The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that the American and Brazilian presidents signed in March 2007 may bring Brazil and the United States closer on energy policy, but it is not clear whether there has been substantive progress implementing the three pillars found in that agreement.

Brazil has also extended its technical expertise to several African countries, including Ghana , Mozambique , Angola , and Kenya . This effort is led by EMBRAPA , the state-owned company in charge for applied research on agriculture, and responsible for most of the achievements in increasing sugarcane productivity during the last thirty years. Another 15 African countries have shown interest in receiving Brazilian technical aid to improve sugarcane productivity and to produce ethanol efficiently. Brazil also has bilateral cooperation agreements with several other countries in Europe and Asia.

As President Lula wrote for The Economist regarding Brazil's global agenda:

Brazil's ethanol and biodiesel programmes are a benchmark for alternative and renewable fuel sources. Partnerships are being established with developing countries seeking to follow Brazil's achievements—a 675m-tonne reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions, a million new jobs and a drastic reduction in dependence on imported fossil fuels coming from a dangerously small number of producer countries. All of this has been accomplished without compromising food security, which, on the contrary, has benefited from rising agricultural output ... We are setting up offices in developing countries interested in benefiting from Brazilian know-how in this field.

Ethanol produced from sugarcane provides energy that is renewable and less carbon intensive than oil. Bioethanol reduces air pollution thanks to its cleaner emissions, and also contributes to mitigate global warming by reducing greenhouse gas emissions. [ citation needed ]

One of the main concerns about bioethanol production is the energy balance , the total amount of energy input into the process compared to the energy released by burning the resulting ethanol fuel. This balance considers the full cycle of producing the fuel, as cultivation, transportation and production require energy, including the use of oil and fertilizers. A comprehensive life cycle assessment commissioned by the State of São Paulo found that Brazilian sugarcane-based ethanol has a favorable energy balance, varying from 8.3 for average conditions to 10.2 for best practice production. This means that for average conditions one unit of fossil-fuel energy is required to create 8.3 energy units from the resulting ethanol. These findings have been confirmed by other studies.

Another benefit of bioethanol is the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions as compared to gasoline, because as much carbon dioxide is taken up by the growing plants as is produced when the bioethanol is burnt, with a zero theoretical net contribution. Several studies have shown that sugarcane-based ethanol reduces greenhouse gases by 86 to 90% if there is no significant land use change, and ethanol from sugarcane is regarded the most efficient biofuel currently under commercial production in terms of GHG emission reduction.

However, two studies published in 2008 are critical of previous assessments of greenhouse gas emissions reduction, as the authors considered that previous studies did not take into account the effect of land use changes . Recent assessments carried out in 2009 by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the California Air Resources Board (CARB) included the impact of indirect land use changes (ILUC) as part of the lifecycle analysis of crop-based biofuels. Brazilian sugarcane ethanol meets both the ruled California Low-Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) and the proposed federal Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS2), despite the additional carbon emissions associated with ILUC. On February 3, 2010, EPA issued its final ruling regarding the RFS2 for 2010 and beyond, and determined that Brazilian ethanol produced from sugarcane complies with the applicable 50% GHG reduction threshold for the advanced fuel category. EPA's modelling shows that sugarcane ethanol from Brazil reduces greenhouse gas emissions as compared to gasoline by 61%, using a 30-year payback for indirect land use change (ILUC) emissions . By September 2010 five Brazilian sugarcane ethanol mills have been approved by the EPA to export their ethanol in the U.S. under the advanced biofuel category.

A report commissioned by the United Nations, based on a detailed review of published research up to mid-2009 as well as the input of independent experts worldwide, found that ethanol from sugar cane as produced in Brazil "in some circumstances does better than just 'zero emission.' If grown and processed correctly, it has negative emission, pulling CO 2 out of the atmosphere, rather than adding it." In contrast, the report found that U.S. use of maize for biofuel is less efficient, as sugarcane can lead to emissions reductions of between 70% and well over 100% when substituted for gasoline. A 2010 study commissioned by the European Commission found that emission reduction effects of first-generation biofuels are positive, even after discounting indirect land use change effects , particularly the "more emission-efficient" sugarcane ethanol from Brazil, which would have to be imported to assure the environmental viability of the  EU's biofuels mandate.

Another 2010 study published by the World Bank found that "Brazil's transport sector has a lower carbon intensity compared to that of most other countries because of its widespread use of ethanol as a fuel for vehicles." The study also concluded that despite the already low emission intensity , urban transportation is responsible for 51% of CO 2 emissions within the Brazilian transport sector in 2008, and mainly originate in the growing use of private cars, traffic congestion and inefficient public transportation systems. Nevertheless, the study concluded that the increased use of flexible-fuel vehicles and the switch from gasoline to sugarcane ethanol are expected to stabilize GHG emissions from the light vehicle fleet over the next 25 years despite an expected increase in the number of kilometers traveled. Furthermore, the study found that if bioethanol's market share of the gasoline-powered vehicle market reaches 80% in 2030, this switch from gasoline "could deliver more than one-third of total emissions reduction targeted for the transport sector over the period" (2008–2030). The study also concluded that by increasing Brazilian ethanol exports to attend the increasing international demand for low-carbon fuels , its trade partners will benefit from reduced CHG emissions. However, for this opportunity to be realized, trade barriers and subsidies in many countries will have to be reduced or eliminated.

A 2009 study published in Energy Policy found that the use of ethanol fuel in Brazil has allowed to avoid over 600 million tons of CO 2 emissions since 1975, when the Pró-Álcool Program began. The study also concluded that the neutralization of the carbon released due to land-use change was achieved in 1992. In another estimate, UNICA , the main Brazilian ethanol industry organization, estimated that just the use of ethanol fuel in flex-fuel vehicles in Brazil has avoided 83.5 million tons of CO 2 emissions between March 2003 and January 2010.

The widespread use of ethanol brought several environmental benefits to urban centers regarding air pollution . Lead additives to gasoline were reduced through the 1980s as the amount of ethanol blended in the fuel was increased, and these additives were eliminated by 1991. The addition of ethanol blends instead of lead to gasoline lowered the total carbon monoxide (CO), hydrocarbons , sulfur emissions, and particulate matter significantly. The use of ethanol-only vehicles has also reduced CO emissions drastically. Before the Pró-Álcool Program started, when gasoline was the only fuel in use, CO emissions were higher than 50 g/km driven; they had been reduced to less than 5.8 g/km in 1995. Several studies have also shown that São Paulo has benefit with significantly less air pollution thanks to ethanol's cleaner emissions. Furthermore, Brazilian flex-fuel engines are being designed with higher compression ratios , taking advantage of the higher ethanol blends and maximizing the benefits of the higher oxygen content of ethanol, resulting in lower emissions and improving fuel efficiency.

Even though all automotive fossil fuels emit aldehydes, one of the drawbacks of the use of hydrated ethanol in ethanol-only engines is the increase in aldehyde emissions as compared with gasoline or gasohol . However, the present ambient concentrations of aldehyde, in São Paulo city are below the reference levels recommended as adequate to human health found in the literature. Other concern is that because formaldehyde and acetaldehyde emissions are significantly higher, and although both aldehydes occur naturally and are frequently found in the open environment, additional emissions may be important because of their role in smog formation. However, more research is required to establish the extent and direct consequences, if any, on health.

Ethanol production has also raised concerns regarding water overuse and pollution, soil erosion and possible contamination by excessive use of fertilizers . A study commissioned by the Dutch government in 2006 to evaluate the sustainability of Brazilian bioethanol concluded that there is sufficient water to supply all foreseeable long-term water requirements for sugarcane and ethanol production. Also, and as a result of legislation and technological progress, the amount of water collected for ethanol production has decreased considerably during the previous years. The overuse of water resources seems a limited problem in general in São Paulo, particularly because of the relatively high rainfall, yet, some local problems may occur. Regarding water pollution due to sugarcane production, Embrapa classifies the industry as level 1, which means "no impact" on water quality.

This evaluation also found that consumption of agrochemicals for sugar cane production is lower than in citric, corn, coffee and soybean cropping. Disease and pest control, including the use of agrochemicals, is a crucial element in all cane production. The study found that development of resistant sugar cane varieties is a crucial aspect of disease and pest control and is one of the primary objectives of Brazil's cane genetic improvement programs. Disease control is one of the main reasons for the replacement of a commercial variety of sugar cane.

Advancements in fertilizers and natural pesticides have all but eliminated the need to burn fields. Sugarcane fields are traditionally burned just before harvest to avoid harm to the workers, by removing the sharp leaves and killing snakes and other harmful animals, and also to fertilize the fields with ash. There has been less burning due to pressure from the public and health authorities, and as a result of the recent development of effective harvesting machines. In the mid 1990s, it was very common to experience quite dense ash rains in cities within the sugarcane's fields during harvest seasons.
A 2001 state law banned burning in sugarcane fields in São Paulo state by 2021, and machines will gradually replace human labor as the means of harvesting cane, except where the abrupt terrain does not allow for mechanical harvesting. However, 150 out of 170 of São Paulo's sugar cane processing plants signed in 2007 a voluntary agreement with the state government to comply by 2014. Independent growers signed in 2008 the voluntary agreement to comply, and the deadline was extended to 2017 for sugar cane fields located in more abrupt terrain. By the 2009/10 harvest season more than 50% of the cane was collected in São Paulo with harvesting machines. Mechanization will reduce pollution from burning fields and has higher productivity than people, but also will create unemployment for these seasonal workers, many of them coming from the poorest regions of Brazil. Due to mechanization the number of temporary workers in the sugarcane plantations has already declined as each harvester machine replaces about 100 cane cutters a day and creates 30 jobs including operators and maintenance teams.

Two studies published in 2008 questioned the benefits estimated in previous assessments regarding the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from sugarcane-based ethanol, as the authors consider that previous studies did not take into account the direct and indirect effect of land use changes . The authors found a "biofuel carbon debt" is created when Brazil and other developing countries convert land in undisturbed ecosystems, such as rainforests , savannas , or grasslands , to biofuel production, and to crop production when agricultural land is diverted to biofuel production. This land use change releases more CO 2 than the annual greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions that these biofuels would provide by displacing fossil fuels. Among others, the study analyzed the case of Brazilian Cerrado being converted for sugarcane ethanol production. The biofuel carbon debt on converted Cerrado is estimated to be repaid in 17 years, the least amount of time of the scenarios that were analyzed, as for example, ethanol from US corn was estimated to have a 93-year payback time. The study conclusion is that the net effect of biofuel production via clearing of carbon-rich habitats is to increase CO 2 emissions for decades or centuries relative to fossil fuel use.

Regarding this concern, previous studies conducted in Brazil have shown there are 355 million ha of arable land in Brazil, of which only 72 million ha are in use. Sugarcane is only taking 2% of arable land available, of which ethanol production represented 55% in 2008. Embrapa estimates that there is enough agricultural land available to increase at least 30 times the existing sugarcane plantation without endangering sensitive ecosystems or taking land destined for food crops. Most future growth is expected to take place on abandoned pasture lands, as it has been the historical trend in São Paulo state. Also, productivity is expected to improve even further based on current biotechnology research, genetic improvement, and better agronomic practices, thus contributing to reduce land demand for future sugarcane cultures. This trend is demonstrated by the increases in agricultural production that took place in São Paulo state between 1990 and 2004, where coffee , orange , sugarcane and other food crops were grown in an almost constant area.

Also regarding the potential negative impacts of land use changes on carbon emissions, a study commissioned by the Dutch government concluded that "it is very difficult to determine the indirect effects of further land use for sugar cane production (i.e. sugar cane replacing another crop like soy or citrus crops, which in turn causes additional soy plantations replacing pastures, which in turn may cause deforestation), and also not logical to attribute all these soil carbon losses to sugar cane." Other authors have also questioned these indirect effects, as cattle pastures are displaced to the cheaper land near the Amazon. Studies rebutting this concern claim that land devoted to free grazing cattle is shrinking, as density of cattle on pasture land increased from 1.28 heads of cattle/ha to 1.41 from 2001 to 2005, and further improvements are expected in cattle feeding practices.

A paper published in February 2010 by a team led by Lapola from the University of Kassel found that the planned expansion of biofuel plantations (sugarcane and soybean) in Brazil up to 2020 will have a small direct land-use impact on carbon emissions, but indirect land-use changes could offset the carbon savings from biofuels due to the expansion of the rangeland frontier into the Amazonian forests, particularly due to displacement of cattle ranching. "Sugarcane ethanol and soybean biodiesel each contribute to nearly half of the projected indirect deforestation of 121,970 km 2 by 2020, creating a carbon debt that would take about 250 years to be repaid using these biofuels instead of fossil fuels." The analysis also showed that intensification of cattle ranching, combined with efforts to promote high-yielding oil crops are required to achieve effective carbon savings from biofuels in Brazil, "while still fulfilling all food and bioenergy demands".

The main Brazilian ethanol industry organization (UNICA) commented that this study and other calculations of land-use impacts are missing a key factor, the fact that in Brazil "cattle production and pasture has been intensifying already and is projected to do so in the future".

Other criticism have focused on the potential for clearing rain forests and other environmentally valuable land for sugarcane production, such as the Amazon , the Pantanal or the Cerrado . Embrapa and UNICA have rebutted this concern explaining that 99.7% of sugarcane plantations are located at least 2,000 kilometres (1,200 mi) from the Amazonia, and expansion during the last 25 years took place in the Center-South region, also far away from the Amazonia, the Pantanal or the Atlantic forest. In São Paulo state growth took place in abandoned pasture lands.

The impact assessment regarding future changes in land use, forest protection and risks on biodiversity conducted as part of the study commissioned by the Dutch government concluded that "the direct impact of cane production on biodiversity is limited, because cane production replaces mainly pastures and/or food crop and sugar cane production takes place far from the major biomes in Brazil (Amazon Rain Forest, Cerrado, Atlantic Forest, Caatinga, Campos Sulinos and Pantanal)." However, "the indirect impacts from an increase of the area under sugar cane production are likely more severe. The most important indirect impact would be an expansion of the area agricultural land at the expense of cerrados. The cerrados are an important biodiversity reserve. These indirect impacts are difficult to quantify and there is a lack of practically applicable criteria and indicators."

In order to guarantee a sustainable development of ethanol production, in September 2009 the government issued by decree a countrywide agroecological land use zoning to restrict sugarcane growth in or near environmentally sensitive areas such as the Pantanal wetlands , the Amazon rainforest and the Upper Paraguay River Basin. The installation of new ethanol production plants will not be permitted on these locations, and only existing plants and new ones with environmental licensed already approved before September 17, 2009, will be allowed to remain operating in these sensitive areas. According to the new criteria, 92.5% of the Brazilian territory is not suitable for sugarcane plantation. The government considers that the suitable areas are more than enough to meet the future demand for ethanol and sugar in the domestic and international markets foreseen for the next decades.

Sugarcane has had an important social contribution to some of the poorest people in Brazil by providing income usually above the minimum wage , and a formal job with fringe benefits. Formal employment in Brazil accounts an average 45% across all sectors, while the sugarcane sector has a share of 72.9% formal jobs in 2007, up from 53.6% in 1992, and in the more developed sugarcane ethanol industry in São Paulo state formal employment reached 93.8% in 2005. Average wages in sugar cane and ethanol production are above the official minimum wage, but minimum wages may be insufficient to avoid poverty. The North-Northeast regions stands out for having much lower levels of education among workers and lower monthly income. The average number workers with 3 or less school years in Brazil is 58.8%, while in the Southeast this percentage is 46.2%, in the Northeast region is 76,4%. Therefore, earnings in the Center-South are not surprisingly higher than those in the North-Northeast for comparable levels of education. In 2005 sugarcane harvesting workers in the Center-South region received an average wage 58.7% higher than the average wage in the North-Northeast region. The main social problems are related to cane cutters which do most of the low-paid work related to ethanol production.

The total number of permanent employees in the sector fell by one-third between 1992 and 2003, in part due to the increasing reliance on mechanical harvesting, especially from the richer and more mature sugarcane producers of São Paulo state. During the same period, the share of temporary or seasonal workers has fluctuated, first declining and then increasing in recent years to about one-half of the total jobs in the sector, but in absolute terms the number of temporary workers has declined also. The sugarcane sector in the poorer Northeast region is more labor-intensive as production in this region represents only 18.6% of the country's total production but employs 44.3% of worker force in the sugarcane sector.

The manual harvesting of sugarcane has been associated with hardship and poor working conditions. In this regard, the study commissioned by the Dutch government confirmed that the main problem is indeed related to manual cane harvesting. A key problem in working conditions is the high work load. As a result of mechanization the workload per worker has increased from 4 to 6 ton per day in the eighties to 8 to 10 ton per day in the nineties, up to 12 to 15 ton per day in 2007. If the quota is not fulfilled, workers can be fired. Producers say this problem will disappear with greater mechanization in the next decade. Also, as mechanization of the harvesting is increasing and only feasible in flat terrain, more workers are being used in areas where conditions are not suitable for mechanized harvesting equipment, such as rough areas where the crops are planted irregularly, making working conditions harder and more hazardous.

Also unhealthy working conditions and even cases of slavery and deaths from overwork (cane cutting) have been reported, but these are likely worst-case examples. Even though sufficiently strict labor laws are present in Brazil, enforcement is weak. Displacement and seasonal labor also implies physical and cultural disruption of multifunctional family farms and traditional communities.

Regarding social responsibility the ethanol production sector maintains more than 600 schools, 200 nursery centers and 300 day care units, as legislation requires that 1% of the net sugar cane price and 2% of the net ethanol price must be devoted to medical, dental, pharmaceutical, sanitary, and educational services for sugar cane workers. In practice more than 90% of the mills provide health and dental care, transportation and collective life insurance, and over 80% provide meals and pharmaceutical care. However, for the temporary low wage workers in cane cutting these services may not be available.

Some environmentalists , such as George Monbiot , have expressed fears that the marketplace will convert crops to fuel for the rich, while the poor starve and biofuels cause environmental problems. Environmental groups have raised concerns about this trade-off for several years. The food vs fuel debate reached a global scale in 2008 as a result of the international community 's concerns regarding the steep increase in food prices . In April 2008, Jean Ziegler , back then United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, called biofuels a "crime against humanity", a claim he had previously made in October 2007, when he called for a 5-year ban for the conversion of land for the production of biofuels. Also in April 2008, the World Bank 's President, Robert Zoellick , stated that "While many worry about filling their gas tanks, many others around the world are struggling to fill their stomachs. And it's getting more and more difficult every day."

Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva gave a strong rebuttal, calling these claims "fallacies resulting from commercial interests", and putting the blame instead on U.S. and European agricultural subsidies , and a problem restricted to U.S. ethanol produced from maize. The Brazilian President has also claimed on several occasions that his country's sugar cane–based ethanol industry has not contributed to the food price crises.

A report released by Oxfam in June 2008 criticized biofuel policies of rich countries as neither a solution to the climate crisis nor the oil crisis, while contributing to the food price crisis. The report concluded that from all biofuels available in the market, Brazilian sugarcane ethanol is "far from perfect" but it is the most favorable biofuel in the world in term of cost and greenhouse gas balance. The report discusses some existing problems and potential risks, and asks the Brazilian government for caution to avoid jeopardizing its environmental and social sustainability. The report also says that: "Rich countries spent up to $15 billion last year supporting biofuels while blocking cheaper Brazilian ethanol, which is far less damaging for global food security."

A World Bank research report published in July 2008 found that from June 2002 to June 2008 "biofuels and the related consequences of low grain stocks, large land use shifts, speculative activity and export bans" accounted for 70–75% of total price rises. The study found that higher oil prices and a weak dollar explain 25–30% of total price rise. The study said that "large increases in biofuels production in the United States and Europe are the main reason behind the steep rise in global food prices" and also stated that "Brazil's sugar-based ethanol did not push food prices appreciably higher." The report argues that increased production of biofuels in these developed regions were supported by subsidies and tariffs on imports, and considers that without such policies, price increases worldwide would have been smaller. This research paper also concluded that Brazil's sugar cane–based ethanol has not raised sugar prices significantly, and recommends removing tariffs on ethanol imports by both the U.S. and EU, to allow more efficient producers such as Brazil and other developing countries, including many African countries, to produce ethanol profitably for export to meet the mandates in the EU and U.S.

An economic assessment report also published in July 2008 by the OECD agrees with the World Bank report regarding the negative effects of subsidies and trade restrictions, but found that the impact of biofuels on food prices are much smaller. The OECD study is also critical of the limited reduction of GHG emissions achieved from biofuels produced in Europe and North America, concluding that the current biofuel support policies would reduce greenhouse gas emissions from transport fuel by no more than 0.8% by 2015, while Brazilian ethanol from sugar cane reduces greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80% compared to fossil fuels. The assessment calls on governments for more open markets in biofuels and feedstocks in order to improve efficiency and lower costs.

A study by the Brazilian research unit of the Fundação Getúlio Vargas regarding the effects of biofuels on grain prices. concluded that the major driver behind the 2007–2008 rise in food prices was speculative activity on futures markets under conditions of increased demand in a market with low grain stocks. The study also concluded that expansion of biofuel production was not a relevant factor and also that there is no correlation between Brazilian sugarcane cultivated area and average grain prices, as on the contrary, the spread of sugarcane was accompanied by rapid growth of grain crops in the country.



Grey's Anatomy is an American medical drama television series focusing on the personal and professional lives of surgical interns , residents , and attendings at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital (later renamed Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital, and finally Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital). The series premiered on March 27, 2005, on ABC as a mid-season replacement and has been renewed annually for two decades. Its title is a mixture of the protagonist's surname and the name of the classic human anatomy textbook Gray's Anatomy . Writer Shonda Rhimes developed the pilot and served as showrunner, head writer, and executive producer until stepping down in 2015. Set in Seattle , Washington, the series is filmed primarily in Los Angeles , California, and Vancouver , British Columbia.

The original cast consisted of nine star-billed actors: Ellen Pompeo , Sandra Oh , Katherine Heigl , Justin Chambers , T. R. Knight , Chandra Wilson , James Pickens Jr. , Isaiah Washington , and Patrick Dempsey . For most of its run, the series revolves around Dr. Meredith Grey (Pompeo), chronicling her progression from surgical intern to fully-qualified doctor. The cast has undergone major changes throughout the series' run, with only three original members remaining by the 19th season – Pompeo, Wilson, and Pickens. Pompeo stepped back from the series in its 19th season, at which point the show shifted to more of an ensemble format. In March 2026, ABC announced the 23rd season of Grey’s Anatomy expected to stream in the fall of 2026. Grey's Anatomy had two spin-off series : Private Practice (2007–2013) and Station 19 (2018–2024); as well as a web series, Grey's Anatomy: B-Team .

Grey's Anatomy is the longest-running scripted primetime show currently airing on ABC, and the longest scripted primetime series carried by ABC. Its success catapulted many series regulars, including Pompeo, Oh, and Dempsey, to worldwide recognition; they were among the five highest-earning television actors in 2013. Once among the overall top 10 shows in the United States, the show's ratings have fallen, although as of 2017 [ update ] it was still one of the highest-rated shows among the 18–49 demographic . The show also does well on streaming television ; as of February 2023 [ update ] , Grey's Anatomy was ranked the 10th most popular on-demand program.

Grey's Anatomy has been well received by critics throughout much of its run and has been included in various critics' year-end top 10 lists. Since its inception, the show has been described by the media outlets as a television "phenomenon" or a "juggernaut", owing to its longevity and dominant ratings. It is considered to have had a significant effect on popular culture and has received numerous awards , including the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama and a total of 38 Primetime Emmy Award nominations, including 2 for Outstanding Drama Series . The cast members have also received accolades for their individual performances.

The series follows the life of Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ), the daughter of world renowned general surgeon Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ), starting from her acceptance into the surgical residency program at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital (later named Seattle Grace Mercy West, and finally, Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital). During her time as an intern, Grey works alongside fellow physicians Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ), Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ), Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) and George O'Malley ( T. R. Knight ), who each struggle to balance their personal lives with hectic schedules and stressful residency requirements. During their internship , they are overseen by Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ), a senior resident , who works with attending physicians Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ), head of neurosurgery and Meredith's love interest, and Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ), head of cardiothoracic surgery and Yang's eventual fiancé. Richard Webber ( James Pickens Jr. ), Chief of Surgery and attending general surgeon, is the former lover of Ellis Grey. During the first six seasons, Burke, O'Malley, and Stevens all depart the series.

In addition to Webber, Burke, and Shepherd, the surgical wing is primarily supervised by Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ), Shepherd's ex-wife and the head of OB/GYN , neonatal and fetal surgery who leaves for Los Angeles at the end of Season 3 ; Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ), head of plastic surgery and also certified in ENT surgery ; Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ), a resident who later becomes head of orthopedic surgery and leaves Seattle for New York at the end of Season 12 ; Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ), as head of cardiothoracic surgery and Burke's replacement, who leaves Seattle Grace in Season 5 after a disagreement with Torres; Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ), as head of trauma surgery who later marries and divorces Yang; Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ), as head of pediatric surgery , and later head of maternal/fetal surgery who marries Torres; Teddy Altman ( Kim Raver ), as head of cardiothoracic surgery who departs at the end of Season 8 but returns in Season 14 , later marrying Hunt; and Amelia Shepherd ( Caterina Scorsone ), Derek's sister, who is hired to replace him as head of neurosurgery.

Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ), Meredith's paternal half-sister, joins the residency program in season 4 until her death with her love interest Sloan in a plane crash at the end of Season 8 , after which Seattle Grace is renamed Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital in their memory. Former Mercy West residents April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) and Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) join Seattle Grace following a hospital merger in Season 6 . Other additions include Leah Murphy ( Tessa Ferrer ), who departs at the end of Season 10 but returns during Season 13 ; Shane Ross ( Gaius Charles ), who leaves with Yang to work in Zürich , Switzerland, in the Season 10 finale ; Stephanie Edwards ( Jerrika Hinton ), who resigns at the end of Season 13; Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ), who has a tumultuous romantic relationship with Karev; Andrew DeLuca ( Giacomo Gianniotti ), the former love interest of Meredith's maternal half-sister Maggie Pierce ( Kelly McCreary ) who also served as head of cardiothoracic surgery; and Ben Warren ( Jason George ), an anesthesiologist -turned resident-turned firefighter who marries Bailey.

Season 11 sees the deeply impactful death of Derek Shepherd. In Season 12, attending cardiovascular surgeon Nathan Riggs ( Martin Henderson ) joins the show, and later briefly becomes Meredith's love interest. In the early episodes of Season 14, Tom Koracick ( Greg Germann ), an attending neurosurgeon, begins making appearances and Riggs leaves the series to start a life with Owen's long-lost sister Megan ( Abigail Spencer ); by the season finale, Robbins, Kepner and Warren also depart the show, with Warren joining the fire department featured on Station 19 before returning after the end of that series.

Midway through Season 16 , Cormac Hayes ( Richard Flood ) becomes the new chief of pediatric surgery as Karev departs to reunite with Stevens. During Season 17 , DeLuca is stabbed while chasing a child abductor/human trafficker and despite the efforts of Hunt and Altman, he dies. Avery and Koracick also depart in Season 17, with Avery moving to Boston to take over his family's charitable foundation and Koracick leaving to assist him. In Season 18 , Hayes moves back to Ireland , Hunt and Altman flee the country, transplant surgeon Nick Marsh (Scott Speedman), a patient of Meredith's turned love interest, returns to Minnesota , and Bailey resigns as Chief of Surgery, leaving Meredith to take over the role.

In Season 19 , new interns Simone Griffith ( Alexis Floyd ), Benson "Blue" Kwan ( Harry Shum Jr. ), Jules Millin ( Adelaide Kane ), Mika Yasuda ( Midori Francis ) and Lucas Adams ( Niko Terho ), Derek and Amelia's nephew, join the program; Meredith moves to Boston, reducing her role at Grey Sloan while she works on a cure for Alzheimer's disease , and Pierce departs to further her own career in Chicago . In Season 20 , Marsh resigns from his role as Residency Director and moves to Boston with Meredith, leaving Bailey to be the new Residency Director. After a traumatic car accident in Season 21 , Yasuda departs from the program. The rest of her class become residents with their own interns to teach in Season 22 , including Griffith's one-night stand Wes Bryant ( Trevor Jackson ).

Grey's Anatomy chronicles the lives of surgical interns , residents , and attendings at the fictional Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital (formerly Seattle Grace Hospital, Season 1–6; Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital, Season 6–9; and then Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital, Season 9–present), as the interns progressively evolve into seasoned doctors under the guidance of their residents, attendings, and the chief of surgery.

Each episode usually opens with a voice-over narration from Meredith Grey or another season regular, often foreshadowing the episode's theme. Most seasons typically mirror the physicians' academic year, with each completed year elevating the residents to a higher level in the surgical field. The season finale often culminates in a dramatic event, such as a character's death or departure.

The series focuses on the doctors' professional lives as surgeons, but also gives significant attention to their personal lives. Character development and relationships frequently take precedence over medical ethics concerns. While the physicians perform intricate surgeries and treat their patients' illnesses, they also exhibit a competitive drive and seek recognition.

Upon arrival at the hospital each morning, residents may compete over who gets assigned a challenging case, often generating tension. A hospital superior typically assigns cases, further intensifying the dynamic between residents and their superiors. Episodes shift between the doctors' interactions with patients and their personal dynamics with colleagues. Once assigned a case, each doctor works to diagnose the patient, typically with the support of an attending physician, which usually results in surgery. Each episode typically features scenes of a surgery towards the center of the episode.

The show often portrays the doctors forming personal connections with their patients, with many cases indirectly reflecting the doctors' own personal struggles. One notable instance is Izzie Stevens ' entanglement with her patient, Denny Duquette, in Season 2 . Relationships between the doctors, whether romantic or platonic, frequently develop and create conflicts between their personal and professional lives.

Emotional moments are often underscored by an indie rock soundtrack, with "songtages" – tracks that run through a montage of scenes, connecting storylines with poignant lyrics – becoming a hallmark of the series. Each episode concludes with a voice-over, generally providing contrast or a follow-up to the initial narration.

This section includes characters who have appeared in the series as credited cast.

The five characters who are first introduced in the series premiere as surgical interns are Meredith Grey, Cristina Yang, Izzie Stevens, Alex Karev, and George O'Malley. They are initially mentored by Dr. Miranda Bailey, a senior resident who becomes the hospital's Chief Resident, and later an attending general surgeon , in Season 6. The surgical program is initially headed by Richard Webber, the Chief of Surgery, who has a pre-existing personal relationship with Meredith, having had an affair with her mother, famed general surgeon Ellis Grey, when Meredith was a child. In Webber's employ are attending neurosurgeon Derek Shepherd, dubbed 'McDreamy' by the residents, and attending cardiothoracic surgeon Preston Burke. Shepherd is introduced as Meredith's love-interest, while Burke begins a relationship with Cristina.

Introduced in the show's second season are obstetrician-gynecologist and neonatal surgeon , Addison Montgomery, plastic and ENT surgeon Mark Sloan (nicknamed 'McSteamy' by the interns), from New York, and orthopedic surgeon Callie Torres. Montgomery is Shepherd's estranged wife who arrives in Seattle seeking reconciliation with him, Sloan is Shepherd's former best friend, who aided the breakdown of his marriage by having an affair with Montgomery, while Torres is introduced as a love-interest, and eventual wife for O'Malley. The penultimate episode of Season 3 introduces Lexie Grey, Meredith's half-sister who unexpectedly decides to pursue her internship at Seattle Grace Hospital after her mother's sudden death, and begins an on-again, off-again relationship with Sloan. Burke and Yang, having been engaged, endeavor to plan their wedding, while Montgomery departs the show in the Season 3 finale , relocating to California, seeking a new life, thus becoming the lead character of the spin-off Private Practice . The Season 3 finale also shows Burke's exit from the show, after leaving Yang at the altar on their wedding day.

Grey, Yang, Stevens, and Karev are all promoted to residents in the Season 4 premiere , while O'Malley is forced to repeat his internship year, following his failing of the intern exam. Subsequently, Torres and O'Malley divorce, due to him having an affair with Stevens, initially concealing it from Torres. Early in the fourth season , cardiothoracic surgeon Erica Hahn becomes Torres's love-interest. During the fifth season , Hahn departs from the series after a disagreement with Torres, and O'Malley retakes his intern exam, passes and joins his fellow physicians as a resident. Two new characters are introduced, former United States Army trauma surgeon Dr. Owen Hunt, and pediatric surgeon Dr. Arizona Robbins. Hunt becomes a love-interest for Yang, while Robbins begins a relationship with Torres. When Stevens is diagnosed with Stage 4 metastatic melanoma , she and Karev get married at the conclusion of the fifth season. In addition, Meredith and Shepherd marry, with their vows written on a blue post-it note .

O'Malley dies in the Season 6 premiere , due to injuries sustained from saving a woman from being hit by a bus, and Stevens later departs Seattle following a communication breakdown with her then-husband Karev following the Seattle Grace merger with Mercy West Hospital. New characters are introduced as Seattle Grace Hospital merges with Mercy West Hospital. Residents April Kepner and Jackson Avery transfer to Seattle Grace Hospital from Mercy West Hospital, and Avery has a brief relationship with Lexie, until she reunites with Sloan. Subsequently, Teddy Altman is introduced as the new Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery. Ben Warren is also introduced in the sixth season , who becomes a romantic interest for Bailey throughout the series, eventually marrying her. In the Season 6 finale , a deceased patient's grieving husband embarks on a shooting spree at the hospital, injuring Karev, Shepherd, and Hunt. In the shooting's emotional reverberations, Yang and Hunt abruptly marry, not wanting to risk separation. Torres and Robbins eventually wed, in Season 7 , officiated by Bailey. In Season 8 , Webber steps down as Chief of Surgery and allocates his job to Hunt. As the final year of residency for Meredith, Yang, Karev, Kepner and Avery is coming to a close, the doctors are all planning to relocate to different hospitals to pursue their specialty careers. However, all plans are put on hold when several doctors from Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital are engaged in a plane crash, which kills Lexie and endangers Meredith, Shepherd, Yang, Sloan and Robbins in the Season 8 finale . The season finale also sees Altman being courteously fired by Hunt as she struggles to decide whether or not to take the job as Chief at the United States Army Medical Command (MEDCOM).

In the Season 9 premiere , Sloan dies due to sustained injuries from the plane crash following a brief relapse of temporary health ("the surge ") and the remaining characters work through their post traumatic stress and Robbins's loss of limb by way of suing Seattle Grace Mercy West, as the hospital was responsible for putting the surgeons on the plane. Meanwhile, Jo Wilson, Stephanie Edwards, Leah Murphy and Shane Ross are introduced as a new group of interns. The ninth season continues with the struggle of the lawsuit and the animosity that it creates within the hospital, Yang and Hunt eventually divorce in order to help the lawsuit. The doctors who were on the plane win the lawsuit, but the payout bankrupts the hospital. They all club together and buy Seattle Grace Mercy West, with the help of the Harper Avery Foundation, and they become the Board of Directors, once being called the "Grey-Sloan 7". One of the changes they implement is renaming the hospital to Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital in memory of Lexie Grey and Mark Sloan. Robbins cheats on Torres with a visiting facial reconstruction surgeon and Webber gets electrocuted in the Season 9 finale , although survives the incident.

Grey's Anatomy saw the departure of one of its major players, Cristina Yang, played by Sandra Oh, as well as the departure of interns Murphy and Ross, in the Season 10 finale .

Amelia Shepherd, the sister of Derek, joined the main cast in Season 11 , transitioning over from being a main character of the spin-off series, Private Practice which had recently ended. The 11th season also saw the introduction of the new Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Maggie Pierce, Richard's secret daughter with Ellis Grey. Towards the end of the 11th season, Derek Shepherd witnesses a car accident and pulls over to help the injured, but his car is hit by a truck with him inside as he attempts to leave the scene. He later dies at another hospital following the doctors' mishandling of his injuries.

Season 12 saw Andrew DeLuca join the main cast as a new intern at the hospital, as well as Nathan Riggs as a new cardiothoracic surgeon with a pre-existing off-screen history with Hunt. The Season 12 finale saw the departure of one of the show's longest-running characters, Callie Torres, played by Sara Ramirez.

Edwards departed at the end of Season 13 , deciding to quit her job as a surgeon after surviving a major fire at the hospital. Riggs departed and Altman returned to Seattle toward the beginning of Season 14 . The fourteenth season also saw the introduction of Tom Koracick who worked as a new neurosurgeon alongside Amelia Shepherd, Levi Schmitt who is a new intern at the hospital, as well as Andrew's sister, Carina DeLuca, an obstetrician who enters into a relationship with Robbins. During the fourteenth season, Warren transitions out to become a main character of the series' second spin-off, Station 19 , after his character decides to quit working at the hospital to become a firefighter. Carina DeLuca eventually joins him as a main character of that spin-off series. Long-time characters, Robbins and Kepner depart the series in the Season 14 finale to pursue other career opportunities.

Season 15 saw the introduction of Atticus "Link" Lincoln, as a new orthopedic surgeon, while Season 16 saw the introduction of Cormac Hayes, a new pediatric surgeon, and Winston Ndugu, a new cardiothoracic surgeon. The sixteenth season was the last to feature Alex Karev, who moved to Kansas to reunite with Stevens, leaving Grey as the last remaining intern from the original cast.

Season 17 saw Nick Marsh, a transplant surgeon, join the ensemble of main characters as a new romantic interest for Meredith Grey. The seventeenth season also saw the departure of Andrew DeLuca, after he was stabbed and ultimately died after pursuing a sex trafficker, and was also the last season to feature both Jackson Avery, who moved to Boston in order to run a family foundation and Koracick, who also moved to Boston to assist Avery, as main characters. Hayes departed the series in Season 18 after deciding to return to Ireland with his kids.

Season 19 saw the introduction of five new interns with Simone Griffith, Mika Yasuda, Benson Kwan, Jules Millin and Lucas Adams, the latter of which is revealed to be a nephew of Amelia and Derek Shepherd. Meredith Grey, one of the last remaining original characters of the series, as well as Pierce, both depart Seattle during the course of Season 19 and appear in recurring and guest capacities afterwards, respectively. Yasuda and Schmitt depart in season 21, with Schmitt moving to Texas for his ped's fellowship and Yasuda quits the program following her sister's death.

With the drama's setting being a hospital, numerous medical personnel appear regularly on the show, as well as several other recurring characters. Joe ( Steven W. Bailey ) is first shown as the owner of the Emerald City Bar and Grill, across the street from the hospital, which is a common relaxation area for the physicians. Also introduced in the pilot is the legendary former general surgeon, Dr. Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ), Meredith's Alzheimer's -stricken mother, who appeared on the show until her death in season 3. In the first season, Olivia Harper ( Sarah Utterback ), a nurse who appeared on the show occasionally until getting laid off in the merger with Mercy West, engages in a sexual relationship with O'Malley, giving him syphilis . Serving as an assistant and secretary to the Chief of Surgery, former nurse Patricia ( Robin Pearson Rose ) has appeared on the show since its debut. Tyler Christian ( Moe Irvin ), a hospital nurse, makes occasional appearances throughout the series. Within the second season, Bailey becomes pregnant by her husband, Tucker Jones ( Cress Williams ), who makes frequent appearances on Grey's Anatomy , until their divorce in season 5. While Bailey takes a sabbatical, due to her pregnancy, the cheerful Dr. Sydney Heron ( Kali Rocha ) fills her position as the resident supervising Grey, Yang, Stevens, Karev and O'Malley, and makes occasional appearances until the fifth season.

Thatcher and Susan Grey ( Jeff Perry and Mare Winningham ), Meredith's estranged father and step-mother, are introduced in season 2, with Susan making appearances until her death in season 3, and Thatcher continuing to appear in the series until his death in season 15. Adele Webber ( Loretta Devine ), is introduced as Richard's wife, who eventually acquires Alzheimer's, in the seventh season, and continued to make appearances until her death in season 9. Introduced as Preston's mother, Jane Burke ( Diahann Carroll ) makes occasional appearances until the fourth season. Denny Duquette ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ), a patient with congestive heart failure , originates as one of Burke's patients, who goes on to propose to Stevens, after weeks of bonding between the two. Facing death, Stevens cuts Duquette's left ventricular assist device (LVAD), to elevate his position on the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) transplant list. This ultimately ends in his death in the season 2 finale , marking his initial departure from the show, and placing Stevens on disciplinary probation. Initially conceived as a veterinarian hired for Shepherd's dog, Doc, Dr. Finn Dandridge ( Chris O'Donnell ) soon becomes a love-interest for Meredith, while Shepherd is with Montgomery. Dandridge is included in a multi-episode story arc in seasons 2 and 3, consisting of 9 episodes, ending when Meredith reunites with Shepherd.

In season 3, George's father, Harold O'Malley ( George Dzundza ), is diagnosed with cancer and dies, with his wife Louise ( Debra Monk ) and George's brothers Jerry ( Greg Pitts ) and Ronny ( Tim Griffin ) by his side. Louise goes on to appear occasionally, and was last seen in season 8. A ferryboat accident brings along Rebecca Pope ( Elizabeth Reaser ), who is initially introduced as a pregnant amnesiac Jane Doe patient. Pope eventually embarks on a relationship with Karev, until she is diagnosed with a personality disorder in season 4, and makes her final departure. Amidst the crisis of the ferryboat crash, Meredith falls into the water at the disaster site. Although rescued, she goes into cardiac arrest, waking up in what appears to be limbo. Within the limbo, Meredith is entertained by deceased acquaintances Duquette and Dylan Young ( Kyle Chandler ), who was killed during a bomb crisis in the second season, until eventually being resuscitated. Seeking a cure to her depression, Meredith undergoes therapy sessions with the hospital psychiatrist, Dr. Katharine Wyatt ( Amy Madigan ), who in addition serves as a psychiatrist to Hunt.

The season 4 premiere introduces several new interns, to be trained under Meredith, Yang, Stevens, Karev, and eventually O'Malley. [b] Among them are Dr. Steve Mostow ( Mark Saul ), who continues to make appearances, and Dr. Sadie Harris ( Melissa George ), who formed a friendship with Meredith while the two were in college. Harris is fired in the fifth season, due to not actually having a medical degree , and departs the show immediately after. Meredith and Shepherd's relationship reaches a crisis, and the two separate, leaving Shepherd to entertain a relationship with Rose ( Lauren Stamile ), a nurse. Rose appears frequently until season 5, when Derek and Meredith decide to rekindle their flame. Throughout the fifth season, Stevens experiences full-out hallucinations of Duquette, signaling that she is ill, and once she is lucid, he departs, marking his final appearance. Following the announcement of her relationship with Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ), Callie's father Carlos Torres ( Hector Elizondo ) initially contests his daughter's concurrence in homosexuality, but eventually accepts it, and he reappears several times throughout the series.

The hospital's merging with Mercy West introduces new residents: Dr. Reed Adamson ( Nora Zehetner ) and Dr. Charles Percy ( Robert Baker ), but the two are both murdered in the season 6 finale . Also introduced in the sixth season is Dr. Ben Warren ( Jason George ), an anesthesiologist and eventual husband to Dr. Miranda Bailey, as well as Sloan Riley ( Leven Rambin ), Dr. Mark Sloan's estranged pregnant daughter who seeks kinship with him. Robbins receives a grant to aid children in Malawi , which leads to a falling-out between her and Torres. While in Malawi, Robbins is replaced by Dr. Robert Stark ( Peter MacNicol ), a pediatric surgeon with an interest in Dr. April Kepner, who appears occasionally until season 8. Following the breakdown of Dr. Torres's relationship with Dr. Robbins, Dr. Torres becomes pregnant with Dr. Sloan's baby. Torres's relationship with Robbins is subsequently mended, and the couple endeavors to raise their new daughter, Sofia Robbin Sloan Torres, with the help of Dr. Sloan. Dr. Lucy Fields ( Rachael Taylor ), an obstetrician-gynecologist, is introduced in the seventh season, and serves as a love-interest for Dr. Alex Karev, until eventually taking up Robbins' job in Africa. Shepherd and Meredith also become new parents, with their adoption of Zola, a baby girl from Malawi. [c] Conceived as a patient with a tumor condition who later develops diabetes , Henry Burton ( Scott Foley ) befriends Dr. Altman and eventually joins her in marriage only to get treated using her medical insurance, until he dies while undergoing heart surgery in season 8. Dr Catherine Avery (played by Debbie Allen), a urologist, is introduced in the show's eighth season and subsequently makes recurring appearances in all subsequent seasons thus far. Her character becomes a romantic interest for Dr Richard Webber, and eventually his second wife following the death of his first wife, Adele.

In the season 9 premiere, interns Dr. Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ), Dr. Shane Ross ( Gaius Charles ), Dr. Stephanie Edwards ( Jerrika Hinton ), Dr. Leah Murphy ( Tessa Ferrer ) and Dr. Heather Brooks ( Tina Majorino ) are introduced. Steven Culp and William Daniels play Dr. Parker and Dr. Craig Thomas, respectively. Dr. Parker is Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery and Dr. Craig Thomas ( William Daniels ) is an attending cardiothoracic surgeon at Mayo Clinic , where Cristina worked temporarily. Dr. Alana Cahill ( Constance Zimmer ) introduced in season 9 is appointed to cut costs at the hospital and she eventually decides the best course of action would be to seek out a new buyer until the 4 crash survivors and Torres on the behalf of Sloan pool their money together in a bid to purchase the hospital themselves. Kepner starts dating a paramedic named Matthew Taylor ( Justin Bruening ) and they form a deep relationship over the course of seasons 9 and 10 and she eventually agreed to marry before reconciling with Avery in the middle of her wedding ceremony to Matthew. Lauren Boswell ( Hilarie Burton ) is introduced as a craniofacial surgeon consulting on a case at Grey Sloan Memorial who showed romantic interest in Arizona and eventually ended up having a one-night stand with her.

Dr. Heather Brooks dies in the premiere of season 10. She goes to search for Dr. Webber and finds him lying in the basement of the hospital. Trying to save Dr. Webber, she accidentally steps into a puddle and electrocutes herself while hitting her head as she falls. Also introduced in season 10 was Dr. Karev's estranged father Jimmy Evans ( James Remar ) who tries to form a relationship with his son but fails repeatedly, and dies in a botched surgery. The conclusion of season 10 has Cristina leaving Grey Sloan for Dr. Burke's job as head of Klausman Institute for Medical Research in Zurich, while Dr. Ross makes a last-minute decision to follow her in order to study under her. Dr. Maggie Pierce ( Kelly McCreary ) unknowingly drops a bombshell that she is the child of Dr. Webber and the late Dr. Grey, and was given up at birth for adoption. Dr. Meredith Grey has to accommodate another half-sister in her life. Also, Dr. Yang privately gives her shares in the hospital to Dr. Karev, also giving him her seat on the board. But Dr. Webber all but promises the seat to Dr. Bailey, so the board has to decide between them. Season 11 begins with new surgical residents coming to the hospital. Introduced in season 11 is Dr. Nicole Herman ( Geena Davis ), who is Chief of Fetal Surgery at Grey Sloan Memorial. Dr. Herman selects Robbins for a fetal surgery fellowship and becomes her mentor. Herman features in a 12-episode arc before departing in episode 14. Season 14 sees the introduction of Taryn Helm (played by Jaicy Elliot), a new intern who eventually becomes a resident, with recurring appearances in the series in all subsequent seasons thus far.

Shonda Rhimes wanted to make a show that she would enjoy watching, and thought it would be interesting to create a show about "smart women competing against one another".

When asked how she decided to develop a medical drama , Rhimes responded:

I was obsessed with the surgery channels... My sisters and I would call each other up and talk about operations we'd seen on the Discovery Channel . There's something fascinating about the medical world—you see things you'd never imagine, like the fact that doctors talk about their boyfriends or their day while they're cutting somebody open. So when ABC asked me to write another pilot, the [operating room] seemed like the natural setting.

The series was pitched to ABC Entertainment , which gave it the greenlight . It was picked up as a mid-season replacement for Boston Legal in the 2005 television season . Francie Calfo , executive vice president of development at ABC Entertainment, noted that ABC was looking for a medical show that stood apart from the others airing at the time. She pointed out:

Medical shows are hard, and it was hard trying to figure out where ours could be different. But where everybody else is speeding up their medical shows, [Rhimes] found a way to slow it down, so you get to know the characters. There's definitely a strong female appeal to it.

ER is high-speed medicine. The camera flies around, adrenaline is rushing. My show is more personal. The idea for the series began when a doctor told me it was incredibly hard to shave her legs in the hospital shower. At first, that seemed like a silly detail. But then I thought about the fact that it was the only time and place this woman might have to shave her legs. That's how hard the work is.

While creating the characters and writing the initial script, the series' writers did not have specific character descriptions in mind, instead hoping to cast the best actor available for each role. Shonda Rhimes has expressed that if the network had not permitted her to create characters this way, she would have been hesitant to continue with the series. Female roles, in particular, were crafted to be multi-faceted and complex characters.

Rhimes offered her insight:

I wanted to create a world in which you felt as if you were watching very real women. Most of the women I saw on TV didn't seem like people I actually knew. They felt like ideas of what women are. They never got to be nasty or competitive or hungry or angry. They were often just the loving wife or the nice friend. But who gets to be the bitch? Who gets to be the three-dimensional woman?

The show's title, Grey's Anatomy , was devised as a play on words, referencing both Henry Gray 's classic English medical textbook, Gray's Anatomy (first published in 1858 and still in print), and the title character Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ). All but one episode has been titled after a song, with notable examples including " A Hard Day's Night ", " It's the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine) " (which lent its name to two episodes) and " How to Save a Life ". The episode that breaks from the pattern is "1-800-799-7233", which references the National Domestic Violence Hotline , although a song with that name did exist at the time. According to then showrunner Krista Vernoff , the title change was suggested by actor Giacomo Gianniotti (who plays Andrew DeLuca ). The original name of the episode was "Four Seasons in One Day".

Before the series debuted on March 27, 2005, a few early screenings were shown to close friends and family of the producers and actors. The show was initially scheduled to run in the Boston Legal time slot for four weeks. Due to its high ratings and viewership, ABC decided to keep it in that time slot for the remainder of the season. ABC Entertainment President, Steve McPherson, explained the scheduling change: "Ultimately, we decided that, without having adequate lead time or marketing dollars to devote to moving either show so late in the season, we'd continue to let [ Grey's Anatomy ] build on its tremendous momentum through May."

Prior to its broadcast, there were discussions about changing the show's title from Grey's Anatomy to Complications , though this change never took place.

List of showrunners throughout the series' run:

Grey's Anatomy is a joint production by Shondaland , Lionsgate Television (formerly known as The Mark Gordon Company before season 15 episode 11, and as eOne Television from season 15 episode 11 all the way to the season 19 finale) and 20th Television (formerly Touchstone Television before season 4 episode 3, ABC Studios from season 4 episode 3 all the way to the season 16 finale, and ABC Signature from its season 17 premiere until season 21 episode 8). Shonda Rhimes , Betsy Beers , Krista Vernoff , Mark Gordon , Rob Corn , and Mark Wilding have all served as executive producers throughout the series. In later seasons, Steve Mulholland, Kent Hodder, Nancy Bordson, James D. Parriott , and Peter Horton have also been executive producers, with Allan Heinberg joining the team in 2006. By Season 8 , the executive producers were Rhimes, Beers, Gordon, Vernoff, Corn, Wilding, and Heinberg.

Rhimes serves as the series' head writer , or its most prolific writer. In the show's early years, she often promoted the series by answering fan questions on her Twitter account. Other key members of the writing staff include Vernoff, Wilding, Peter Nowalk , Stacy McKee, William Harper, Zoanne Clack , Tony Phelan , Joan Rater , and Debora Cahn . From seasons 2 through 7 , the writers maintained a blog titled Grey Matter , where the writer of an episode provided insights into the writing process.

Directors vary by episode, with Rob Corn being the most frequent director, followed by Tom Verica . Horton, Edward Ornelas, and Jessica Yu have also directed numerous episodes. Cast members Chandra Wilson , Debbie Allen and Kevin McKidd have each directed multiple episodes as well.

Susan Vaill has edited Grey's Anatomy since its inception, with David Greenspan joining as an editor in 2006. Casting directors Linda Lowy and John Brace have been part of the production team since 2005. The show's production design is led by Donald Lee Harris, with Brian Harms assisting as art director. Mimi Melgaard heads costume design, with Thomas Houchins supervising costumes. Ellen Vieira serves as the makeup artist, while Jerilynn Stevens is the hairstylist. The Director of Photography is Herbert Davis, and the music coordinator is Danny Lux .

The show's medical authenticity is ensured by consultants Karen Lisa Pike, M.D. and Linda Klein, R.N. In an interview, Ellen Pompeo (who plays Meredith Grey ) shared that the cast frequently consults the medical team for accuracy, asking about procedures and surgeries to ensure authenticity. Many cast members observed real-life surgeries to prepare for their roles.

In addition to their work on the show, the production staff participates in a Grey's Anatomy softball team, which competes against teams from other television shows, such as CSI: Crime Scene Investigation .

She brought this energy that felt very fresh. From the beginning, I've been shaping Cristina around Sandra a little bit. One of my favorite things to do is take as much of her dialogue out of a scene as possible because she does so much nonverbally. Then I just watch what she manages to do without having a word to say.

Grey's Anatomy used a color-blind casting technique, resulting in a racially diverse ensemble. Each role was cast without the character's race being pre-determined, keeping Rhimes's vision of diversity. The production staff began casting with the program's title character, Dr. Meredith Grey , which Rhimes said was a challenging role to cast. "I kept saying we need a girl like that girl from Moonlight Mile (2002) [a] ," said Rhimes, "and after a while, they were like, 'We think we can get that girl from Moonlight Mile ." The next to be cast, Sandra Oh ( Dr. Cristina Yang ), was initially invited to audition for the character of Bailey, but pressed to read for the role of Cristina instead. Many actors read for the role of Dr. Derek Shepherd . Rob Lowe was offered the role, but turned it down as he had already agreed to star in another medical drama Dr. Vegas . When Patrick Dempsey read for the part, "he was just perfect," according to Rhimes.

The only character developed with a racial description in mind was Dr. Miranda Bailey , who is portrayed by Chandra Wilson. Her character was first described as a tiny blonde with curly hair, but when Wilson began speaking, Rhimes reported: "[Wilson] is exactly who Miranda is." James Pickens Jr. was selected to appear as Dr. Richard Webber in the series' pilot and first season . Katherine Heigl wanted to portray Dr. Izzie Stevens as a brunette but was requested to retain her natural blonde for the part. Isaiah Washington , who portrayed Dr. Preston Burke , initially read for the role of Shepherd but was cast as Burke, because the actor who had been intended to play Burke, Paul Adelstein , had to withdraw due to commitments to the movie Be Cool . T. R. Knight signed on for the pilot as Dr. George O'Malley , expecting that the role might be short-lived, because he liked that the character was multi-faceted. Rounding out the season 1 cast was Justin Chambers as Dr. Alex Karev , a character who was not originally included in the show's pilot, but added through digital editing and additional scenes.

Rhimes later shifted focus away from physical descriptions of characters, instead emphasizing the feelings and qualities they conveyed.

Season 2 marked the introduction of attending doctors Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) and Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ). They were initially cast as recurring characters, but both were given star billing at the opening of Season 3 . Ramirez was cast after ABC executives offered them a role in the network show of their choice; Dane had previously auditioned unsuccessfully for a role in the pilot episode. Dr. Addison Montgomery (Kate Walsh ) also joined the show in Season 2, after making a guest appearance in the season 1 finale

In October 2006, Washington allegedly insulted Knight with a homophobic slur, during an on-set altercation with Dempsey, and ABC terminated Washington's contract at the end of Season 3. Washington returned for a guest appearance in season 10. At the conclusion of Season 3, Walsh departed the show to pursue the Grey's Anatomy spin-off, Private Practice , but continues to make guest appearances.

Chyler Leigh joined the cast as a main character in Season 4 as Dr. Lexie Grey , Meredith's half-sister. Leigh had appeared as a guest-star in the final 2 episodes of Season 3. On the selection of Leigh for the role of Lexie, Rhimes said: "Chyler stood out ... It felt like she could be Meredith's sister, but she had a depth that was very interesting."

Dr. Erica Hahn (Brooke Smith ), who first appeared on Grey's Anatomy in Season 2, returned as a series regular in Season 4. Shortly after the announcement that Smith would be a regular member of the cast, Entertainment Weekly ' s Michael Ausiello , reported that her character, Hahn, would depart from Grey's Anatomy on November 6, 2008. E! Online ' s Kristin Dos Santos asserted that Smith's dismissal from the show had been forced by the ABC network, as part of an attempt to "de-gay" Grey's Anatomy . Rhimes countered these claims, saying that "we did not find that the magic and chemistry with Brooke's character would sustain in the long run".

Season 5 introduced actor Kevin McKidd ( Dr. Owen Hunt ), who was signed as a series regular after originally being cast for a specific story-arc. In addition, Jessica Capshaw ( Dr. Arizona Robbins ) was originally introduced for a three-episode arc, but her contract was extended until the end of the season; she became a series regular in the sixth season .

Knight departed the show at the conclusion of Season 5, citing an unhappiness with the development and lack of screen-time for his character. Directly following Knight's departure, Entertainment Weekly reported that Heigl had not returned to the set as scheduled after her maternity leave. It was later confirmed that Heigl would not return to the show at all.

Kim Raver , who was cast as recurring character Dr. Teddy Altman in season 6 , was given star billing later in the season. Sarah Drew ( Dr. April Kepner ) and Jesse Williams ( Dr. Jackson Avery ), who both made their series debuts as recurring characters in the sixth season, and received star-billing in the seventh .

The six original actors' contracts expired after Season 8 , but in May 2012, Pompeo, Oh, Chambers, Wilson, Pickens Jr. and Dempsey renewed their contracts with the show for another two years. At the conclusion of season 8, Leigh's character Lexie Grey departed from the show at Leigh's request, and with Rhimes's agreement. Raver's character Teddy Altman was also written out of the show during the Season 8 finale . Rhimes said that Raver had been offered a contract renewal, but declined.

In July 2012, Dane (Sloan) confirmed that he was departing the show to pursue other projects; he made his final appearances in the first two episodes of Season 9 . With the start of season 10, Camilla Luddington, Gaius Charles, Jerrika Hinton and Tessa Ferrer were introduced to the show as series regulars. They were first introduced to the show in season 9 as the new interns. On August 13, 2013, Oh (Cristina) announced that the show's tenth season would be her final one because she had decided to pursue more diverse career opportunities. In March 2014, it was announced that Isaiah Washington, who portrayed Preston Burke in the first three seasons of the show, would make a guest appearance to coincide with the departure of series regular Sandra Oh, his former on-screen love-interest. Neither Charles's nor Ferrer's contracts were renewed for Season 11 .

On May 2, 2014, it was announced that, in addition to Pompeo and Dempsey, all the original remaining cast members—apart from Oh—signed 2-year deals, extending their contracts through seasons 11 and 12. Despite joining the series in season 2, Sara Ramirez was on the same negotiation schedule as the season 1 cast and also signed a new two-year deal. On April 23, 2015, Dempsey departed the show during the show's 11th season, despite the fact that he still had a year left in his contract. Dempsey decided to leave because the show was too time-consuming. He wanted to spend more time with his family, so in season 11 his character died. On the night of the Season 12 finale , May 19, 2016, Sara Ramirez announced that they would be leaving the show following the decision not to renew their contract.

On January 17, 2018, it was announced by ABC that Ellen Pompeo's contract had been renewed through Season 16 . Not only did the contract renewal ensure that Pompeo would return as Meredith Grey, but it made her a producer of Grey's Anatomy and a co-executive producer of Station 19 . The deal made Pompeo the highest-paid actress currently on a dramatic TV series, with her making $575,000 per episode and over $20 million yearly. On March 8, 2018, it was announced that series regulars Jessica Capshaw and Sarah Drew would not be returning for Season 15 after executive producers decided to let them go. In May 2018, it was confirmed that Kim Raver, who made returning guest appearances in Season 14 , would once again become a series regular, beginning with season 15. In January 2020, Justin Chambers announced that he had departed the series to pursue more diverse career opportunities and that his final episode had aired on November 14, 2019. In March 2021, Giacomo Gianniotti departed the series after wanting to pursue new things such as directing. In May 2021, Jesse Williams and Greg Germann both left the main cast, although Germann is expected to remain on the show in a guest capacity. In September 2021, it was announced that Kate Walsh would be returning as Addison Montgomery for multiple episodes in season 18. In July 2022, it was announced that Alexis Floyd , Niko Terho, Adelaide Kane , Midori Francis and Harry Shum Jr. joined the cast as series regular for the nineteenth season. In August 2022, it was announced that Ellen Pompeo will appear in only eight episodes of the upcoming nineteenth season, but that she will continue to narrate the episodes and will remain an executive producer. In May 2024, it was announced that Jake Borelli will leave the series in season 21, along with Midori Francis. In June 2024, it was announced that Jason George would be reupped to a series regular after appearing in a recurring capacity since the series' fifteenth season due to appearing on Station 19 . In August 2024, it was announced that Michael Thomas Grant will recur as new hospital chaplain James.

Rhimes initially considered setting the medical drama in her hometown, Chicago , but ultimately decided on Seattle to distinguish Grey's Anatomy from the Chicago-based series ER .

Fisher Plaza, the former headquarters of Fisher Communications (now merged into Sinclair Broadcast Group ) and home to Sinclair's ABC-affiliated KOMO radio and television stations in Seattle, is used for some exterior shots of Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital. Notably, air ambulances land on the KOMO-TV news copter's helipad, suggesting the hospital's proximity to the Space Needle (located across the street from Fisher Plaza), the Seattle Monorail , and other iconic landmarks.

However, the hospital used for most exterior and some interior shots is not located in Seattle; these scenes are filmed at the VA Sepulveda Ambulatory Care Center in North Hills, Los Angeles , California , and shots from an interior walkway occasionally show dry California mountains in the background. Most scenes are filmed at The Prospect Studios in Los Feliz, Los Angeles , just east of Hollywood , where Grey's Anatomy occupies six sound stages. Some outdoor scenes are shot at Warren G. Magnuson Park in Seattle.

The exterior of Meredith Grey's house, also known as the Intern House, is a real location. In the show, Grey's home address is 613 Harper Lane, though this is not a real address. The physical house is located at 303 W. Comstock St., in Queen Anne, Seattle , Washington .

Many of the props used in the show are functional medical equipment, including a working MRI machine . When asked about operating room scenes, Sarah Drew (who plays April Kepner ) said:

We work with bovine organs, which is cow's organs, The smell is repulsive and makes us all gag. And we use an actual soldering tool to solder the organs. It smells like burning flesh. There's also a lot of silicone and blood matter, red jello mixed with blood and chicken fat. It's pretty gross.

Costumes are used to differentiate between attending surgeons and residents : attending surgeons wear navy blue scrubs , while residents wear light blue scrubs. The series is filmed using a single-camera setup , similar to many other dramas. Grey's Anatomy often utilizes the " walk-and-talk " filming technique, a method popularized by earlier series such as St. Elsewhere , ER , and The West Wing .

Grey's Anatomy ' s first season commenced airing as a mid-season replacement to Boston Legal on March 27, 2005, and concluded on May 22, 2005. The 9-episode season aired on Sundays in the 10:00pm EST time slot, following Desperate Housewives , although it had initially been slated for a January 2005 debut in the Monday 10:00pm EST time slot. The show was renewed by ABC for a second season, that aired in the same time slot as season 1. Premiering on September 25, 2005, and concluding on May 15, 2006, the season consisted of 27 episodes. As the original first season order was for 13 episodes, 5 episodes were held for season 2, as ABC decided to close the first season of Grey's Anatomy on the same night as Desperate Housewives ' finale. During season 2, Grey's Anatomy produced 2 specials recapping the events of recent episodes, narrated by Bailey, entitled "Straight to the Heart" and "Under Pressure". The show was renewed for a third season, which was relocated to the coveted Thursday 9:00 pm EST time slot. The show has remained on Thursdays since then. Commencing on September 21, 2006, and ending on May 17, 2007, season 3 consisted of 25 episodes. 2 more specials were produced during the show's third season, entitled "Complications of the Heart" and "Every Moment Counts", which were narrated by Bailey and Morgan, respectively.

ABC renewed Grey's Anatomy for a fourth season, which aired from September 27, 2007, to May 22, 2008, and ultimately consisted of 17 episodes. Season 4 had a reduced number of episodes, due to the 2007–08 Writers Guild of America strike , which caused production to cease from February to April, leaving the show with no writing staff during that time. At the beginning of season 4, the show aired its final special entitled "Come Rain Or Shine", created to transition viewers from Grey's Anatomy to Private Practice , which was narrated by the editors of People magazine. The show received a renewal for a fifth season, which premiered on September 25, 2008, and concluded on May 14, 2009, consisting of 24 episodes. The series was renewed for a sixth season consisting of 24 episodes, which commenced on September 24, 2009, and ended on May 20, 2010. During season 6, Grey's Anatomy aired a series of webisodes entitled Seattle Grace: On Call at ABC.com. ABC renewed the show for a seventh season, which premiered on September 23, 2010, and concluded on May 19, 2011, consisting of 22 episodes. This was followed up with Seattle Grace: On Call , Seattle Grace: Message of Hope , aired during the beginning of season 7. Also during season 7, the series produced a musical episode entitled " Song Beneath the Song ", featuring songs that became famous through their use in Grey's Anatomy . The show received a 24-episode eighth season renewal, which commenced on September 22, 2011, with a 2-hour episode, and ended on May 17, 2012. Grey's Anatomy was renewed for a ninth season, which premiered on September 27, 2012, and ended on May 16, 2013. Grey's Anatomy was renewed for a tenth season on May 10, 2013 and premiered on September 27, 2013, with a 2-hour episode, and ended on May 15, 2014.

On May 8, 2014, ABC renewed the series for an 11th season that aired from September 25, 2014, to May 14, 2015. In addition, the show was relocated to the Thursday 8:00 pm EST time slot. After four seasons outside the Top 25 rated shows, Grey's Anatomy was the No. 15 show in the 2013–2014 season, the show's tenth. The show also re-entered the Top 5 shows in the 18–49 viewer demographic. On May 7, 2015, ABC renewed the series for a 12th season that premiered on September 24, 2015, and concluded on May 19, 2016. The 13th season aired from September 22, 2016, to May 18, 2017. The 14th season aired from September 28, 2017, to May 17, 2018. The 15th season aired from September 27, 2018, to May 16, 2019. The 16th season aired from September 26, 2019, to April 9, 2020. The 17th season aired from November 12, 2020, to June 3, 2021. On May 10, 2021, the series was renewed for an 18th season, which premiered on September 30, 2021. On January 10, 2022, the series was renewed for a 19th season, which premiered on October 6, 2022. On March 24, 2023, ABC renewed the series for a 20th season with Meg Marinis now serving as the showrunner. The 20th season premiered on March 14, 2024. In April 2024, ABC announced the show had been picked up for a 21st season, with Marinis remaining as the show-runner. In a statement, Rhimes expressing her gratitude for Marnis, who joined the series during the third season, telling The Hollywood Reporter : "Meg Marinis' storytelling is a gift that continues to keep the show vibrant, compelling and alive, and I can't wait to see what she has in store for next season." On April 3, 2025, ABC renewed the series for a 22nd season which premiered on October 16, 2025. On March 30, 2026, ABC renewed the series for a 23rd season.

Grey's Anatomy episodes air regularly on ABC in the United States. Each episode is approximately 43 minutes long and is broadcast in both high and standard-definition . The series' episodes are also available for download in both qualities on the iTunes Store and Amazon Video . ABC Video-On-Demand offers recent episodes for temporary viewing, while episodes can also be streamed on ABC's official Grey's Anatomy website, as well as on Hulu and Xfinity .

In 2009, ABC signed a deal to allow episodes to stream on Netflix . The show is syndicated on Lifetime , with one-hour blocks airing weekdays at 1:00 pm, 2:00 pm, and 3:00 pm EST. In certain regions, such as Germany and the United Kingdom, the full series is available on Disney+ .

Since its debut, Buena Vista Home Entertainment has released the first 13 seasons on DVD to regions 1, 2, and 4. The season 1 DVD, released on February 14, 2006, features an alternate title sequence, bloopers, behind-the-scenes footage, audio commentaries, and an extended edition of the pilot episode. The season 2 DVD, released on September 12, 2006, which includes extended episodes, an interview with Wilson, deleted scenes, a set tour, a "Q&A" with the cast, and a segment on the special effects creation. The season 3 DVD was released on September 11, 2007, with bonus features including extended episodes, an interview with star Dempsey, audio commentaries, and bloopers.

The season 4 DVD released on September 9, 2008, features an interview with Heigl and Chambers, extended episodes, bloopers, and deleted scenes. The season 5 DVD was released on September 15, 2009, and includes unaired scenes, bloopers, and extended episodes. The season 6 DVD, released on September 14, 2010, features deleted scenes, an extended finale, and bloopers. The season 7 DVD, released on September 13, 2011, includes an extended edition of and a behind-the-scenes featurette on the musical episode, bloopers, as well as deleted scenes. In addition, the season 8 DVD was released on September 4, 2012, with several bonus features and deleted scenes.

The season 9 DVD released on August 27, 2013, with several bonus features and deleted scenes. The season 10 DVD was released on September 2, 2014, with new several bonus features and deleted scenes. The season was officially released on DVD as a 6-disc box-set under the title of Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Tenth Season – Live For The Moments on September 2, 2014. In view of the departure of the character of Cristina Yang in the season finale, the DVD set featured an extended episode Do You Know? and a special feature from Sandra Oh titled " An Immeasurable Gift ". Season 11 released on DVD as a 6-disc box set on August 18, 2015, with interviews with new series regular Caterina Scorsone and a special feature for Dempsey's departure, titled " How To Say Goodbye Dr. Derek Shepherd ". Season 12 released on DVD as a 6-disc box set on August 30, 2016. Season 13 released on DVD as a 6-disc box set on August 29, 2017.

Grey's Anatomy offers a different and perhaps more valuable idea of what it means to be strong: the capacity to suffer terribly, break down completely, and then get up again, confident that you're bigger than the sum of the tragedies you've suffered—because everyone else is, too. The layers of history have grown pretty dense and rich, and the friendships that form around them as the characters suffer and survive is the glue of the series, and what—despite a few inevitable hit-or-miss patches—elevates it to something special.

Grey's Anatomy has been well received among critics. As of August 2023, the show holds an average score of 84% on Rotten Tomatoes . Emily St. James of The A.V. Club gave an insight on the series' overwhelming success and the lows, writing that the quality arc is "all over the place". She noted the steady build-up in the first season; the series skyrocketing into a phenomenon in the second season; the gradual dip in season three; and "some seriously bumpy moments" in the fourth season, which was interrupted by the writers' strike. St. James felt that the "climb begins again in season five". Samantha Highfill of Entertainment Weekly in a review wrote, "I believe the show's best season to date is season 2 . Let me make it clear that I'm not saying seasons 3 through 9 were bad. In my opinion, there have only been a few lulls in the show's history, and most of them didn't last a full season." adding, "I still enjoy the show, and I'll honestly never stop watching. By any standards, Grey's Anatomy has been successful television, ranking highly in the ratings for nine seasons and entering the cultural lexicon via phrases as cloying yet catchy as 'McDreamy', the show has had its periods of being intensely irritating, and it has had its periods when it seems as if Shonda Rhimes has taken leave of her faculties, but it's also got an amazingly high batting average, particularly with every solid season that passes along in this second act of its run." The site lauded the show saying, "On average, it's been very good TV, filled with interesting, driven characters who run the gamut of professions within the show's hospital setting. It's been, by turns, a good soap , a good romantic comedy , a good medical drama , and a good interpersonal show about an unexpected workplace family."

The first season received positive reviews which steadily built up, with Gary Levin of USA Today calling Grey's Anatomy one of the top shows on television. The New York Daily News named Grey's Anatomy a "winner", and Newsday expressed a positive opinion by stating "You simply can't stop watching." The Washington Post ' s Tom Shales was critical of season one, finding it reminiscent of ER and commenting that "the show is much more a matter of commercial calculation than an honest attempt to try something fresh and different." Shortly after its initial airing, the Chicago Tribune ' s Maureen Ryan called Grey's Anatomy the new Friends (a concluded National Broadcasting Company (NBC) sitcom following the lives of a group of young adults, that for all of its 10-year run was in the top-5 for viewer ratings). The second season received high critical acclaim: top critics like Emily St. James of The A.V. Club called the show a "phenomenon", adding the show was "one of the best TV shows around", while Samantha Highfill of Entertainment Weekly later during the tenth season called the second "the show's best season to date". However, Kevin Carr of 7M Pictures opined that Grey's Anatomy is a mere combination of Scrubs , ER , Sex and the City and The Love Boat . It further garnered positive reviews: Christopher Monfette of IGN added "The second season of this medical drama expertly wove its signature elements of complex relationships, whimsical banter and challenging life-lessons; all to a montage-fetish, indie-rock soundtrack." Todd Gilchrist, also from IGN , called the season "terrific" adding, "Indeed, one of the best currently on television. While it remains to be seen what the creators do with it, now that it's become an outright event program, the season demonstrates that Rhimes and co. know what to do with the opportunities presented them. Whether you're male or female, this is the kind of entertainment that small-screen devotees and folks fed up with television need to see."

The title character of Grey's Anatomy , Meredith, has received both widespread critical acclaim and weary feedback by critics along the course of the show, with the development of the character garnering praise from majority critics. Earlier reactions for Meredith were mixed; in a 2006 review, Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times dubbed her "the heroine of Grey's Anatomy ". A reviewer for BuddyTV praised the distinct uniqueness in the character calling Meredith an "unconventional heroine" adding that the character was "Neither black nor white but always ... wait for it ... many shades of grey." The reviewer went on to add that even in her lighter moments, she has still been "dark and twisty." The sentiment was shared by Glenn Diaz who remarked, "You gotta love Mer when she's gloomy." When Pompeo did not receive a nomination at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards , for her work as Meredith, Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times suggested that Pompeo, "has worked very hard ... to make Meredith Grey an interesting character", and should have received a nomination. IGN ' s Monfette, less impressed by the character, criticized her storyline as "some bizarrely under-developed sub-plot about depression and giving Derek a season's worth of reconsidering to do." Robert Rorke of the New York Post was critical of Meredith's relationship with Derek Shepherd , writing: "She used to be the queen of the romantic dilemmas, but lately, she's been a little dopey, what with the endless 'McDreamy' soliloquies." The development of the character has received praise from critics. Reviewing the first part of the eighth season, TV Fanatic wrote: "this season belongs to Meredith Grey. She is the heart and soul of the show and has been outstanding. This is a character that used to be so dark and twisty and has now grown into a more mature woman. Ellen Pompeo has been at the top of her game this season." Rick Porter reviewing the episode " How to Save a Life " from the 11th season for Zap2it wrote, "Without Meredith, and without one of Pompeo's strongest performances in her long time on the show, 'How to Save a Life' would have run the risk of coming across as a baldly manipulative death episode, the likes of which the show has done several times before. He added " ' How to Save a Life' may not be the ideal Emmy-submission episode for Ellen Pompeo, considering Meredith is off screen for more than half of it. But it's among the best work she's ever done on the show." Janalen Samson of BuddyTV lauded the Meredith's development throughout the series, saying "When one considers how this character has grown over eleven seasons, it really is amazing. Kudos to Ellen Pompeo for her fine work. She's actually done the impossible, because I actually care what happens to Meredith Grey." Reviewing the season 12 premiere, " Sledgehammer ", critics including Alex Hawkins of the Western Gazette again highlighted Pompeo's being due for an Emmy Award .

The majority of the supporting cast of Grey's Anatomy have been well received as well, with the New York Post ' s Rorke deeming Stevens to be "the heart-and-soul" of Grey's Anatomy , whereas Eyder Peralta of the Houston Chronicle was critical of her character development, stating: "[She's] the reason I don't watch Grey's Anatomy anymore." Kelli Catana of The Huffington Post named Yang "the best damn character" and deemed "the Grey/Yang relationship the most true friendship on network television." Television Without Pity writer Lauren Shotwell claimed Yang is "the only one of these five [residents] that regularly acts like an actual doctor". Analyzing Alex Karev , Rachel Simon called him "underrated", and she pointed out that his personal growth never seems to get acknowledged, as "Alex has evolved, slowly and realistically, into a genuinely good person whose faults don't miraculously disappear, but take a backseat to much better qualities." Robert Bianco of USA Today said Dempsey has a "seemingly effortless way of humanizing Derek's 'dreamy' appeal with ego and vanity". His friendship with Mark Sloan has been well received. Victor Balta said "they've demonstrated an easy chemistry that makes for some of the great comic relief around Seattle Grace Hospital." Addison Montgomery was deemed "sassy and bright and interesting." TV Guide said of Walsh's stint on Grey's Anatomy that she "adds spice to an already hot show." Callie Torres , after having previously received mixed reviews, was praised for her bisexual storyline. Critics added that the character was anchored by stellar performances by Sara Ramirez . Lexie Grey , having initially been criticized, became a critics' favorite in the series. Alex Keen of The Trades wrote that Lexie's "presence and confidence have increased quite a bit ... and actress, Chyler Leigh , does a fantastic job of making this progression feel seamless. Since the series has defused the tension between Little Grey and Big Grey (aka Meredith), Lexie has clear sailing through the season and steals the show as one of the best current characters on the series."

With the departure of several cast members throughout the seasons, many new characters have been added to the drama's ensemble. McKidd and Capshaw were referred to as "fresh additions" to the series, by Monfette of IGN . Matt Roush of TV Guide commented: "Hunt is the most encouraging thing to happen to Grey's Anatomy in quite a while." Matt Mitovich of TV Guide noted that Robbins "quickly established herself as a fan favorite", describing her as "a breath of fresh air in the often-angsty halls of Seattle Grace. On April Kepner and Jackson Avery , Courtney Morrison of TVFanatic wrote, "April has grown since her character was introduced ... she's honest. A girl with principles is a girl you want to do well." He described her and Avery as "a couple for whom viewers can root". Speaking of the new cast members, in addition to the remaining original ones, Robert Bianco from USA Today called them the show's "best ensemble in years".

Regarding season 3, Bill Carter of The New York Times called Grey's Anatomy "television's hottest show", adding: "[No show] is expected to challenge Grey's Anatomy for prime-time pre-eminence." Contrasting with Carter's view, Monfette of IGN said that it speedily found itself "mired in the annoying and absurd", adding: "This third season may very well represent a case of over-writing a concept that has, perhaps tragically, run bone-dry on narrative fuel." At the conclusion of season 3, Entertainment Weekly ' s Gregory Kirschling said "the show lacked a defining happy, warm-gooseflesh moment", adding that the season "didn't leave you dying for the [next] season premiere". Speaking of the fourth season, Laura Burrows of IGN said the series became "a little more than mediocre, but less than fantastic", adding: "This season proved that even strong chemistry and good acting cannot save a show that suffers from the inevitable recycled plot."

In contrast to the moderately negative feedback the third and fourth seasons received, Alan Sepinwall of The Star-Ledger said of the fifth season: "Overall, it feels more like the good old days than Grey's Anatomy has in a long time." Misha Davenport from the Chicago Sun-Times said season 5 "hits on all the things the show does so well", adding: "There is romance, heartbreak, humor and a few moments that will move fans to tears." Brian Lowry of Variety , less impressed, opinionated that the season 5 displayed the show running out of storylines. Speaking of the sixth season, Bianco of USA Today wrote: " Grey's has always loved grand gestures. You like them or you don't; the only real question is whether the show pulls them off or it doesn't. This year, it did."

The series has a score of 66 out of 100 on Metacritic , based on five reviews for season 7. In response to the season, Bianco from USA Today commented: "Happily, it now seems to have landed on solid ground." Also of the seventh season, Entertainment Weekly ' s Jennifer Armstrong said: "It's in the shooting's emotional reverberations that the show is regenerating after the past few hit-and-miss seasons," whereas Verne Gay of Newsday commented: "Unfortunately, they've settled on far-too-easy and facile answers for the most part." HitFix gave a positive review saying that, "season 7 overall has been one of the show's strongest ever." and added, "There was a time when Grey's Anatomy was this show where I suffered through a lot of stuff that made me cringe to get to those genius melodrama moments it could do so well. Over the last couple of years, it's evolved into a show that's much more consistent in tone, where it may not move me as often as it did in the early years but also very rarely makes me question my reasons for watching." Speaking of season 8, Entertainment Weekly ' s Mandi Bierly called it a "so-so season", and Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter called it "emotional". Also acknowledging the fan base, Verne Gay of Newsday wrote " Grey's has had a good season and has an intensely loyal fan base to prove it" regarding the eighth season.

The ninth season received positive reviews, with Rob Salem of Toronto Star calling it "a solid return to form." Praising the friendship between Meredith and Cristina of Entertainment Weekly wrote, "There's still one good reason to keep watching: Where else can you find such deep friendships between female co-workers". The tenth season was also marked with praise, with Annie Barrett for Entertainment Weekly writing "There's true sorrow here along with the passion, which keeps their dynamic so intriguing to me." Caroline Siede from The A.V. Club wrote in her review for the tenth season "At its best, Grey's Anatomy is about everyday bravery, sacrifice, and courage. At its worst, it's a melodramatic, moralizing soap opera. Both sides are on display as the show heads confidently into its 10th season." Many sources, including Rachel Simon of Bustle and Nicole Pomarico of Wetpaint , claimed that Sandra Oh 's performance during her final season on Grey's Anatomy is worthy of an Emmy nomination .

Bryce Olin of Netflix ranked Grey's 9th among the 50 Best TV Shows on Netflix stating, "It's a tough call, but based on Grey's casting choices and revolutionary portrayals of female doctors in the series, I'm willing to argue that Grey's Anatomy is the best medical drama of all time. Obviously, Shonda Rhimes didn't reinvent the wheel with the series, but there's no denying its popularity." adding, "I understand its significance in the pop culture sphere." He also stated that the show could go higher in the ranks with the upcoming season stating, "Apparently, Grey's Anatomy fans are passionate about their show, although it seems like they've been closeted for the last few years. I'd love to move Grey's Anatomy even higher on the ranking, but I'll have wait until the eleventh season comes to Netflix."

The show was criticized for its handling of a controversy: the Grey's Anatomy scandal revolved around actor Isaiah Washington using a homophobic slur on set. Mainstream media coverage scapegoated this scandal as "black masculinity for perpetrating homophobia, thus containing both sexual and racial difference in the name of tolerance."

Critics included Grey's Anatomy in top ten lists for five of its 14 seasons; these are listed below in order of rank.

Grey's Anatomy makes an impact on how people's perception of the world is created.

Grey's Anatomy has been recognized for its significant influence on popular culture . Entertainment Weekly ' s executive editor, Lori Majewski , remarked, " Grey's Anatomy isn't just a show, it's a phenomenon. When [the] final shows air, every place in New York City is empty. You could get a table at the best restaurants." Similarly, Jace Lacob of The Daily Beast compared its success to that of Friends , calling it a "cultural phenomenon". Media analyst Steve Sternberg of Magna Global USA explained the show's broad appeal, noting that "roughly 80 percent of households during prime time only have one TV set on. People are looking for shows they can watch with other household members."

In its early seasons, Grey's Anatomy introduced the trend of "Mc-labeling", beginning with the character Derek Shepherd being dubbed "McDreamy". This trend became so pervasive that The National Post labeled it a "phenomenon". It was later parodied on shows like ER and Degrassi: The Next Generation . Mark Lawson of The Guardian credited Grey's Anatomy with popularizing the "songtage", or musical montage segments. This trend was parodied by Mad TV in 2006, which spoofed the show's emotional moments and musical montages.

The series has also been praised for redefining what is considered "good" television. The A.V. Club writes, "Since The Sopranos burst onto the scene, we've too often classified a show as 'good' based on how closely it adhered to the dark, violent, male-centric template set out by that particular show. It's time for that to end. At its best, Grey's Anatomy has been among the very best shows on TV, and at its worst, it's been at least fascinating to watch. TV is at its best when it emotionally connects, and even when it seems to be otherwise merrily hurtling off a cliff, Grey's Anatomy is nothing but emotional connection."

The show was ranked No. 66 on Entertainment Weekly ' s "New TV Classics" list in 2007 and was declared the third-highest rated show on IMDb for the first ten years of the platform (2002–2012). The premise of Grey's Anatomy inspired the creation of A corazón abierto , a Colombian adaptation, which in turn spawned a Mexican version of the same name .

A study conducted by Brian Quick from the University of Illinois suggested that the show's portrayal of doctors as "smart, good looking, capable, and interesting" led viewers to associate real-world doctors with those traits. However, Dr. Karen Zink, a surgical resident, deemed the show's portrayal of interns unrealistic, commenting, "None of [the characters] have bags under their eyes. They all leave the hospital dressed cute, with their hair done and makeup on. That is so far away from the reality of interns."

The show has even had real-world life-saving impacts. In 2011, a woman in Sheboygan, Wisconsin survived an asthma attack after her daughter and a friend performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) they learned from Grey's Anatomy . In 2017, an Israeli woman saved her husband by performing cardiac massage she learned from the show. She continued the procedure for 20 minutes until paramedics arrived and transferred the husband to Shaare Zedek Medical Center .

In the 14th season, the episode titled "1-800-799-7233", named after the National Domestic Violence Hotline , was well received by audiences, who used social media to raise awareness about domestic violence and the hotline itself.

Grey ' s Anatomy has received high viewership and ratings since its debut. The first 4 seasons of the program each ranked in the top 10 among all viewers, reaching its peak Nielsen ratings in the second season, attracting an average of 19.44 million viewers per episode, and ranking at #5 overall. Following the show's time-slot being relocated, overall rankings steadily declined, dropping below the top 10 in its fifth season. Grey's Anatomy made its greatest fall from its sixth to seventh season, slipping from #16 to #31. The series is on a steady decline in terms of overall viewership and rankings, yet Grey's Anatomy still holds value in charts when numbers are pulled from the digital video recorder (DVR). It was the most recorded show between 2007 and 2011, based on cumulative totals, and has been for several years in a row.

The most-watched episode of the series is " It's the End of the World ", with 37.88 million viewers, aided by a lead-in from Super Bowl XL . Grey's Anatomy was the most expensive program on television in the 2007–08 season measured by advertising revenue, with earnings of US$400,000 per 30 seconds. The show was named the fourth (behind Desperate Housewives , Two and a Half Men , and American Idol ), and the fifth-highest (behind Glee , Two and a Half Men , The X Factor and American Idol ) revenue-earning show, with the earnings of US$2.67 million and US$2.75 million per half hour in 2011 and 2012 respectively. While Grey's Anatomy is no longer ranked in the top numbers for overall ratings, the show's ranking in the key 18–49 demographic has remained high. As of season 8, the series is the highest-rated drama on television in the target demographic. In 2016, a New York Times study of the 50 TV shows with the most Facebook Likes found that Grey's Anatomy was "most popular in a swath of the middle of the country, particularly in areas with a lower percentage of college graduates".

Below is a table of Grey's Anatomy ' s seasonal rankings in the U.S. television market, based on average total viewers per episode. Each U.S. network television season starts in September and ends in late May, which coincides with the completion of May sweeps.

Grey's Anatomy has received numerous awards and nominations since its inception. The show has been nominated for 39 Primetime Emmy Awards , having been nominated for at least one every year until 2013. At the 57th Primetime Emmy Awards in 2005, Oh was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , which she went on to be nominated for every year until 2009, and Horton was nominated for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series . The following year, at the 58th Primetime Emmy Awards , the series received a nomination for Outstanding Drama Series , which they were nominated for again in 2007. Also in 2006, Wilson was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , which she went on to be nominated for every year until 2009, and Kyle Chandler was nominated for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series . The 58th ceremony also honored Rhimes and Vernoff, who were both nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series . Rhimes, whose career kicked off in 1995, has since produced yet another ABC series, Scandal , which began on air in 2012 and ended in 2019. Beginning in 2005, Rhimes has been continually nominated for numerous awards, including 3 Emmy Awards: first in 2006 for a dramatic series and a separate nomination for writing a dramatic series, followed by a third nomination in 2007 for a dramatic series.

In 2007, at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards , Heigl won the award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , while Knight was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series . Numerous guest actresses have been nominated for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series , including Burton in 2006 and 2007, Christina Ricci in 2006, Reaser in 2007, Diahann Carroll in 2008, and Sharon Lawrence in 2009, but the only actress to have won the award is Devine in 2011, who was nominated again in 2012. The show has also been nominated for 13 Creative Arts Emmy Awards , having won 2 of them: Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series and Outstanding Makeup for a Single-Camera Series (Non-Prosthetic)

The show has received 10 Golden Globe Award nominations since its premiere. At the 63rd Golden Globe Awards , in 2006, the series was nominated for Best Drama Series , Dempsey was nominated for Best Actor in a Drama Series , which he was nominated for again in 2007, and Oh won the award for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries, or Television Film . The following year, at the 64th Golden Globe Awards , in 2007, Pompeo was nominated for Best Actress in a Drama Series , and the show won Best Drama Series . At the 65th Golden Globe Awards , in 2008, Heigl was nominated for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries, or Television Film, while the series in whole was nominated for Best Drama Series.

The series has won People's Choice Awards for Best Drama 5 times in 2007, 2013, 2015, 2016 and 2017 and has been nominated for several other People's Choice Awards , with nominations received by Oh as well as multiple wins from Dempsey, Pompeo winning in recent years 2013 and 2015, Heigl, Wilson, Demi Lovato , for guest starring, and the drama in whole for Favorite TV Drama. In 2007, Rhimes and the female cast were the recipient of the Women in Film Lucy Award , in recognition of the excellence and innovation in the show as a creative work that has enhanced the perception of women through the medium of television. The series has been honored with numerous NAACP Image Award nominations, many having been won, including 5 awards for Outstanding Drama Series . Grey's Anatomy has also received several Screen Actors Guild Awards , with nominations received by Dempsey, as well as wins from Oh, Wilson, and the main cast for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series . The series won a GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Drama Series in 2012, and has received nominations for 8 consecutive years from 2010 to 2017, 2019, 2022, 2023, 2024.

Grey's Anatomy has spawned several spin-offs and adaptations.

On February 21, 2007, The Wall Street Journal reported that ABC was pursuing a spin-off medical drama television series for Grey's Anatomy featuring Walsh's character, Addison Montgomery . Subsequent reports confirmed the decision, stating that an expanded two-hour broadcast of Grey's Anatomy would serve as a backdoor pilot for the proposed spin-off. The cast of Grey's Anatomy was reportedly unhappy about the decision, as all hoped the spin-off would have been given to them. Pompeo commented that she felt, as the star, she should have been consulted, and Heigl disclosed that she had hoped for a spin-off for Stevens. The backdoor pilot that aired on May 3, 2007, sees Montgomery take a leave of absence from Seattle Grace Hospital, to visit her best-friend from Los Angeles, Naomi Bennett ( Merrin Dungey , later Audra McDonald ), a reproductive endocrinology and infertility specialist. While in Los Angeles, she meets Bennett's colleagues at the Oceanside Wellness Center. The two-hour broadcast entitled "The Other Side of This Life" served as the twenty-second and twenty-third episodes of the third season, and was directed by Michael Grossman , according to Variety . The cast included Amy Brenneman , Paul Adelstein , Tim Daly , Taye Diggs , Chris Lowell , and Merrin Dungey .

KaDee Strickland 's character, Charlotte King , who would be introduced in the spin-off's first-season premiere, did not appear in the backdoor pilot. Her addition to the main cast was announced on July 11, 2007, prior to the commencement of the first season. She did not have to audition for the role, but was cast after a meeting with Rhimes. Also not present in the backdoor pilot was McDonald, due to her character, Naomi Bennett, being portrayed by a different actress, Merrin Dungey . However, on June 29, 2007, ABC announced that Dungey would be replaced, with no reason given for the change. The drama was titled Private Practice , and its premiere episode followed the second part of the season debut of Dancing with the Stars , and provided a lead-in to fellow freshman series Dirty Sexy Money . Pushing Daisies , a third new series for the evening, rounded out the lineup as a lead-in to Private Practice . The series ended its run on January 22, 2013, after 6 seasons.

On May 16, 2017, Channing Dungey announced at the ABC Upfronts that the network ordered another Grey's Anatomy spin-off, this one focusing on firefighters in Seattle. The series premiered mid-season in 2018. Stacy McKee, long-term Grey's writer and executive producer, serves as the spin-off's showrunner. The new show was introduced Season 14, Episode 13 , when a house fire brings the firefighters to Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital. In July 2017, it was announced that Jaina Lee Ortiz was the first actress cast in the spin-off series. In September 2017, it was announced that Jason George , who has played Dr. Ben Warren since season 6, would be leaving Grey's Anatomy to move to the spin-off. He continued to be a series regular on Grey's Anatomy until the spin-off began production. In October 2017, it was announced that 5 new series regulars for the spin-off had been cast being Grey Damon , Jay Hayden , Okieriete Onaodowan , Danielle Savre and Barrett Doss. It was also announced that the spin-off had a 10-episode order for the first season. Later in October 2017, it was announced that Miguel Sandoval was cast as the Captain of the firehouse.

On January 9, 2018, it was announced by Sarah Drew on her Instagram page that a 6-episode spin-off series following the new interns of Grey Sloan Memorial would be released for streaming on the ABC app and abc.com on Thursday, January 11, 2018. Grey's Anatomy: B-Team stars Sophia Taylor Ali (Dahlia Qadri), Jake Borelli ( Levi Schmitt ), Alex Blue Davis (Casey Parker), Jaicy Elliot (Taryn Helm), Rushi Kota (Vik Roy) and Jeanine Mason (Samantha "Sam" Bello) with special guest appearances made by Justin Chambers (Alex Karev), Kelly McCreary (Maggie Pierce), Kevin McKidd (Owen Hunt) and James Pickens Jr. (Richard Webber). The 6 episodes in this series were written by Barbara Kaye Friend with Grey's Anatomy series regular Sarah Drew (April Kepner) making her directorial debut directing each of them.

On May 19, 2026, ABC ordered a new spin-off that will be set in Texas. It is slated to premiere in 2027.

Grey's Anatomy has several crossover storylines with both spin-offs Private Practice and Station 19 throughout its run.

In 2006, Doktorlar ("Doctors"), an adaptation of the series, was made by the Turkish network Show TV . It aired for 4 seasons.

In 2010, A Corazón Abierto ("An Open Heart"), an adaptation of the series, was made by the Colombian network RCN TV . It aired for 2 seasons.

In 2011, A Corazón Abierto ("An Open Heart"), an adaptation of the series, was made by the Mexican network TV Azteca . It aired for 2 seasons.

The American Broadcasting Company has partnered with J. Larson CafePress and Barco Uniforms to provide the series' branded merchandise through an online store. The products available include shirts, sweatshirts, kitchenware, homeware, and bags, with the Grey's Anatomy logo on it. [e] Also available are custom unisex scrubs and lab coats in a variety of colors and sizes, designed by Barco. The merchandise released by the company is available for purchase at the Grey's Anatomy official website, and US$1 from every purchase is donated to Barco's Nightingales Foundation.

Five volumes of the Grey's Anatomy Original Soundtrack have been released as of 2011 [ update ] . For the first 2 seasons, the show's main title theme was an excerpt from "Cosy in the Rocket", by British duo Psapp ; it is featured on the first soundtrack album released via ABC's corporate cousin, Hollywood Records , on September 27, 2005. The second soundtrack, featuring songs from the series' second season, was released on September 12, 2006, followed by a third soundtrack with music from the third season. Following the seventh season musical episode " Song Beneath the Song ", " Grey's Anatomy: The Music Event " soundtrack was released, with volume 4 of the soundtrack released subsequently.

In January 2009, Ubisoft announced that it had signed a licensing agreement with ABC Studios to develop a video game based on Grey's Anatomy . Designed for the Wii , Nintendo DS and PC , Grey's Anatomy: The Video Game was released on March 10, 2009. The game lets the player assume the role of one of the main characters, making decisions for the character's personal and professional life, and competing in a number of minigames . It has been criticized by reviewers because of the simplicity of the mini-games and voice actors who do not play the same characters on the series, with Jason Ocampo of IGN giving it a 6/10 overall rating. The Wii release received mixed reviews, and the Windows release received generally unfavorable reviews.

ABC and Nielsen partnered in 2011 to create a Grey ' s Anatomy application for Apple 's iPad . The application was designed to allow viewers to participate in polls and learn trivial facts as they watch a live episode. It uses Nielsen's Media-Sync software to listen for the episode and to post features as the episode progresses.

The creators of the show set up a real online wedding registry to mark the wedding of Meredith Grey and Derek Shepherd. Instead of buying gifts fans were encouraged to donate money to the American Academy of Neurology Foundation.

The Red Sox–Yankees rivalry is a Major League Baseball (MLB) rivalry between the Boston Red Sox and the New York Yankees . Both teams have competed in MLB's American League (AL) for over 120 seasons , and have developed what is considered by many to be the fiercest rivalry in American sports. Nicknamed " The Rivalry " by some, the 1919 sale of star Red Sox player Babe Ruth to the Yankees popularized one of the most well-known aspects of the rivalry: a superstition known as the " Curse of the Bambino ", attributed to Boston’s 86-year World Series drought which began upon Ruth’s sale to New York. Coincidentally, 
when the Red Sox broke the curse by winning the 2004 World Series , they defeated the Yankees in the ALCS after overcoming a 3–0 deficit.

The rivalry is often a heated subject of conversation, especially in the home region of both teams, the Northeastern United States . Until 2014, every MLB postseason featured one or both teams beginning with the inception of the wild card format and resultant additional Division Series in 1995, when both teams were assigned to the American League’s East Division . The Red Sox and the Yankees have faced each other three times in the ALCS, with the Yankees winning twice, in 1999 and 2003 , and the Red Sox winning in 2004 . The two teams have also met once in the American League Division Series (ALDS), in 2018 , with Boston winning 3–1, a series which included a 16–1 Red Sox win in Game 3 at Yankee Stadium , the largest margin of defeat in a postseason game in the Yankees' history. The Red Sox beat the Yankees in the 2021 American League Wild Card Game , while most recently the Yankees beat the Red Sox in the 2025 American League Wild Card Series .

In addition, the teams have twice met in the last regular-season series to decide the AL pennant, in 1904 (when the Red Sox, then known as the Americans, won) and 1949 (when the Yankees won).

The Yankees and the Red Sox finished tied for first in 1978 ; subsequently, the Yankees won a high-profile tie-breaker game for the division title. The first-place tie came after the Red Sox had a 14-game lead over the Yankees more than halfway through the season. Similarly, in the 2004 ALCS, the Yankees ultimately lost a best-of-seven series after leading 3–0. The Red Sox comeback was the only time in American baseball history that a team has come back from a 3–0 deficit to win a series. The Red Sox went on to win the World Series , ending the 86-year-old curse.

This match-up is regarded by some sports journalists as the greatest rivalry in sports. Games between the two teams often generate considerable interest and receive extensive media coverage, including being broadcast on national television. National carriers of Major League Baseball coverage, including Fox / FS1 , ESPN , and MLB Network carry most of the games in the rivalry across the nation, regardless of team standings or playoff implications. Yankees–Red Sox games are some of the most-watched MLB games each season. Outside of baseball, the rivalry has led to violence between fans, along with attention from politicians and other athletes.

Boston and New York City have shared a rivalry as cities since before the American Revolution . For more than a century after its founding, Boston was arguably the educational, cultural, artistic, and economic power in the United States. Its location as a close American port to Europe and its concentration of elite schools and manufacturing hubs helped maintain this position for several decades. During this time period, New York was often looked down upon as the upstart, over-populated, dirty cousin to aristocratic and clean Boston.

In the 19th century, however, New York's economic power outpaced Boston's, fueled by possession of the terminus of the Erie Canal , which spurred massive growth in the manufacturing, shipping, insurance and financial services businesses. Another factor was its more rapid population expansion compared to that of Boston, driven by the growth of these industries, by New York's popularity as an immigration port of entry , and enhanced by a larger population base, even prior to the construction of the Canal – on the eve of the Revolution, New York, with 30,000 people, had nearly twice the population of Boston, with about 16,000. By the start of the 20th century the original dynamic, centered on Boston, had completely shifted as New York, particularly Wall Street , became the financial center of both the United States and the world.

The cities even played two different versions of early baseball. The " Massachusetts Game ," as it was called, was played on a field with four bases and with home plate in the middle; whereas, the "New York Game," popularized by the New York Knickerbocker Club, was played on a diamond with three bases. The "New York Game" spread throughout the nation after the American Civil War and became the foundation for the modern game of baseball.

The Red Sox were one of the most successful teams in baseball from 1901 to 1918. They won the inaugural World Series in 1903 (as the Boston Americans; the team changed its name to Red Sox in 1908) and four more between 1912 and 1918 . The Yankees were founded in 1903 after franchise rights were purchased from the defunct Baltimore Orioles (as the New York Highlanders, in reference to playing games in the Washington Heights neighborhood of Manhattan .) The two teams had their first meeting in Boston on May 7, 1903. The game was marked by a fight when Boston pitcher George Winter was knocked down. Boston would eventually go on to win the pennant and the inaugural 1903 World Series . The 1904 season featured the teams facing each other on opening day. Later in the season, the Highlanders, led by pitcher Jack Chesbro in his record-setting 41 game-winning season, met the Boston Americans in the season's final game to decide the American League pennant winner. Chesbro threw a wild pitch in the top of the ninth inning, allowing the winning run to score from third base, and Boston won the game, and the pennant. The New York Giants , who had already clinched the National League pennant, refused to play in the 1904 World Series because of a perception of the "Junior Circuit" as being inferior (and because of alleged animosity between American League founder and first president, Ban Johnson , and the hierarchy of the Giants, owner John T. Brush and his team's Hall of Fame coach , player-manager John McGraw ); thus, there was no World Series that year. Not until 2004 would the Red Sox again defeat the Yankees in a title-deciding game.

On April 11, 1912, the Highlanders debuted their pinstripes in a game against Boston, by then known as the Red Sox. Nine days later, Boston opened Fenway Park with a game against the Highlanders, who had left their home field of Hilltop Park to play in the newly rebuilt Polo Grounds ; soon thereafter, in 1913, the team dropped the nickname Highlanders in favor of Yankees.

Six years later, the Chicago Cubs scored two runs off of Babe Ruth in game 4 of the Series , snapping his then record World Series scoreless inning streak at 29 + 2 ⁄ 3 innings. The Red Sox won the game, 3–2, and went on to capture their fifth Series title, their third in four years, and fourth in seven years.

The Yankees would however receive one notable moment of glory against the Red Sox during this era. On April 24, 1917, Yankees pitcher George Mogridge threw a no-hitter at Fenway Park, the first in the ballpark's history and first in Yankees history .

In 1916, Broadway producer Harry Frazee purchased the Red Sox, on credit, for $500,000. Frazee lost his patience with Ruth despite the latter's success with the Red Sox, as Ruth had threatened to hold out for a larger contract and become a distraction. After the Red Sox finished sixth in the American League in 1919, Frazee, needing money to finance a Broadway musical, often said to be No, No Nanette (the success of that 1925 play is actually what paid off the loan). However, Ruth was sold to the Yankees in 1919, and "No, No Nanette" was produced by Frazee in 1925. Frazee received $125,000 and a loan of $300,000 – secured on Fenway Park – for Ruth, despite Ruth having set the record for home runs with 29 in 1919. This began a series of deals with the Yankees that resulted in a long period of mediocrity for the Red Sox while the Yankees began their dynasty.

Ruth's arrival in New York simultaneously launched the Yankees dynasty while ravaging the Red Sox. While the Red Sox' five World Series titles were a record at the time, 1918 would be the team's last championship for 86 years. The Yankees then created the greatest dynasty and team in baseball history. Meanwhile, Ruth's home run-hitting prowess anchored the Yankees line-up, which became known as " Murderers' Row " in the late 1920s. The Yankees reached the World Series seven times during Ruth's New York years, winning four. This abrupt reversal of fortunes for the Red Sox marked the beginning of the supposed "Curse of the Bambino." But it was not the Ruth deal alone that reversed the fortunes of both clubs. Frazee also sold many other players to the Yankees.

Robert W. Creamer reported that "[the] loan was made and relations between the two clubs continued to be cordial, with Frazee sending player after player to the Yankees over the next few seasons for more and more cash. This was no accident. Frazee and Yankees owner Tillinghast L'Hommedieu Huston were friends, and American League president Ban Johnson's attempts to drive Frazee out of the game had caused the five teams loyal to Johnson to make no deals with the Red Sox as long as Frazee owned the club, leaving only the Yankees and White Sox as trading partners. When the White Sox' reputation was destroyed in the Black Sox Scandal , Frazee's only option for trades was to deal with the Yankees. The Red Sox soon became a baseball disaster area, finishing dead last nine times in eleven seasons."

Among others, Wally Schang , Everett Scott , Carl Mays , Waite Hoyt , Joe Bush and Sam Jones went from the Sox to the Yankees in the next one to three years, along with Ed Barrow , the former Red Sox manager who became the Yankees' general manager and empire-builder for the first quarter-century of the Yankees' dynasty. Scott, a former Red Sox team captain, actually took the reins as Yankees captain from Ruth when he arrived; in doing so, he became the only player in history to be named captain for both teams.

From 1920 through 2003, the Yankees won 26 World Series championships and 39 pennants, compared to only four pennants for the Red Sox. In every year that the Red Sox won the pennant – 1946 , 1967 , 1975 and 1986 – they lost the World Series 4–3, leaving them with no World Series titles. During this time, the Red Sox finished second in the standings to the Yankees on twelve occasions – in 1938 , 1939 , 1941 , 1942 , 1949 , 1977 , 1978 , and every year from 1998 to 2003 . During the 84-year period, the Yankees finished with a better regular-season record than the Red Sox 66 times, leading one sportswriter to quip that the Yankees' rivalry with the Red Sox was much like the rivalry "between a hammer and a nail." The Yankees finished second in the standings to the Red Sox twice, in 1986 and 1995 .

Just two years after Ruth's sale, he went on to have a record setting season, one of the greatest in major league history for a batter. This propelled the Yankees to win their first pennant and face their cross-town rival . Ruth got hurt during the Series, and the Yankees eventually dropped the last three games, losing the Series 5–3 to the Giants in the last ever best-of-nine Series. Both the Yankees and Giants would play in the 1922 World Series as well, a series that would be the Yankees' last in the two teams' shared stadium at the Polo Grounds, as the Giants served the Yankees an eviction notice after the 1921 season.

The Yankees moved across the Harlem River to the Bronx into Yankee Stadium . On April 18, 1923, the Yankees opened their new home against the Red Sox. Over 74,200 people watched the Yankees defeat the Red Sox, 4–1, in the first game played at the stadium. Babe Ruth hit the new stadium's first home run, christening the stadium as "The House that Ruth Built." Ruth would finish the year with a .393 batting average and the Yankees won their first World Series that year. Of the 24 players on the Yankees, 11 previously played for the Red Sox.

Several lesser known moments in the rivalry occurred during the 1930s. Pitcher Red Ruffing was traded in 1930 from the Red Sox to the Yankees. Ruffing, who had limited success with the Red Sox, would go on to a Hall of Fame career with the Yankees winning six World Series. On May 30, 1938, before 83,533 spectators at Yankee Stadium, Yankees outfielder Jake Powell and Red Sox player-manager Joe Cronin fought on the field and beneath the stands. Both players were fined and suspended for 10 games. The Yankees and Red Sox would finish first and second in the League respectively that year as well as the following. The Yankees went on to sweep the Chicago Cubs in the World Series and the Cincinnati Reds in the World Series a year later.

The rivalry intensified in 1941 when Ted Williams of the Red Sox batted .406, becoming the last player to bat over .400 in a season. Despite his accomplishment, Williams lost the AL MVP race to the Yankees' Joe DiMaggio , who in the same season set the record for a hitting streak, with 56 straight games with a hit. Williams later reminisced about his rivalry with DiMaggio saying "DiMaggio was the greatest all-around player I ever saw. His career cannot be summed up in numbers and awards. It might sound corny, but he had a profound and lasting impact on the country." Both teams almost swapped the two players. In 1947, Boston Red Sox owner Tom Yawkey and Yankees GM Larry MacPhail were rumored to have verbally agreed to trade DiMaggio for Williams, but MacPhail refused to include Yogi Berra and the deal fell through. Joe DiMaggio's younger brother Dom would play for the Red Sox his entire career during the 1940s.

The Red Sox won 15 games in a row in 1946. They were unstoppable and were in first place all but two days in the season, and would play in their first World Series game since 1918, having finished ahead of the Yankees in the American League for the first time since selling Babe Ruth. Since the Red Sox last pennant in 1918, the Yankees had won 14 pennants and 10 World Series. Boston would eventually lose the Series 4–3 to the St. Louis Cardinals .

Former Yankees manager Joe McCarthy came out of retirement after a feud with Yankees ownership to sign with the Red Sox as their manager in 1948. Both the Yankees and the Red Sox were involved in a tight pennant race with the Cleveland Indians until the final weekend. The Red Sox eliminated the Yankees in the final series at Fenway Park, overcoming four DiMaggio hits in the final game to tie Cleveland for the pennant. The situation forced the first-ever one-game playoff in AL history, which the Indians won 8–3 at Fenway Park and preventing the first all-Boston World Series, as the Indians went on to defeat the Boston Braves in the Series .

A year later, the Red Sox entered the final series of the season at Yankee Stadium needing only one win over the Yankees to advance to the World Series. The Sox lost 5–3 on the last day of the season after falling 5–4 the previous day, resulting in the Yankees winning the AL pennant. The Yankees went on to defeat the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1949 World Series for their 12th championship.

The 1951 season opened up at Yankee Stadium. The Yankees defeated the Red Sox in public address (PA) announcer Bob Sheppard first game. Sheppard would go on to serve PA duties at Yankee Stadium for another 56 years. On September 28 of that year, Yankees pitcher Allie Reynolds pitched a no-hitter against the Red Sox. A year later, Red Sox outfielder Jimmy Piersall and Yankees second baseman Billy Martin exchanged insults before a game in Boston, and ended up fighting in the tunnel under the stands. The fight was eventually broken up by Yankees coaches Bill Dickey and Oscar Melillo, and Boston starting pitcher Ellis Kinder . Piersall changed out of his bloody shirt and promptly fought with teammate Maury McDermott. The Red Sox won 5–2 with Piersall sitting the game out.

The Yankees won five consecutive World Series titles from 1949 to 1953, breaking their previous streak of four straight titles from 1936 to 1939. They would also go on to win 14 AL pennants in 16 years from 1949 to 1964.

The 1961 season saw the chase of Babe Ruth's 1927 single season home run record by Roger Maris and Mickey Mantle . Both Maris and Mantle would continue to reach the home run record until Mantle got injured late in the season, leaving Maris to reach the record. On the last day of the season, Maris broke the record with his 61st home run of the year off Red Sox pitcher Tracy Stallard at Yankee Stadium. Former Hall of Fame shortstop for the Yankees, Phil Rizzuto , called the shot in what was one of his first games as an announcer. The Yankees won the game 1–0 to win their 26th American League pennant and then to win their 19th World Series title.

The next year, the Red Sox had been in the middle of a streak of eight straight losing seasons. The team was so bad, that after a 13–3 loss to the Yankees on July 26, Red Sox ace Gene Conley got off the bus and attempted to leave the country and go to Israel. Conley was denied his request because he did not have a passport. Nonetheless, Conley stayed away from the team for three days.

In 1967, Red Sox pitcher Billy Rohr came within a single strike of a no-hitter at Yankee Stadium. Elston Howard hit a two-out, two-strike single in the ninth to break the no-hit bid. Rohr completed the one-hitter, but ultimately finished his career with only two wins, both coming against the Yankees. Later that year, Red Sox third baseman Joe Foy hit a grand slam during the first game of a two-game series. In the second game, Yankees pitcher Thad Tillotson threw two brushback pitches at Foy before beaning him in the batting helmet. In the next inning, Red Sox pitcher Jim Lonborg beaned Tillotson. Both pitchers yelled at each other, and then a brawl ensued. During the fight, Red Sox outfielder Reggie Smith picked up and body-slammed Tillotson to the ground. Two months later, both teams were involved in the longest game ever played (by innings) at Yankee Stadium. New York recorded a 20-inning 4–3 victory over Boston. Earlier that year on August 3, the Yankees traded Howard to the Red Sox to help bolster their team during the pennant race. When Howard returned to Yankee Stadium in a Red Sox uniform, the Yankees fans gave him a standing ovation. Boston would be led by Hall of Famer Carl Yastrzemski 's historic season winning the batting triple crown , leading the Red Sox to the pennant in what was a dream year for the Sox. Howard's contribution would be instrumental in the 1967 World Series , but he and Yastrzemski would lose to Bob Gibson and the St. Louis Cardinals four games to three.

In 1973, the American League adopted the designated hitter rule . On April 6, opening the season at Fenway Park, Ron Blomberg of the Yankees became the first designated hitter in Major League history. Red Sox pitcher Luis Tiant walked Blomberg in his first plate appearance of the game. Later that year at Fenway Park, with the score tied 2–2 in the top of the ninth, Yankees catcher Thurman Munson attempted to score from third base on a missed bunt by Gene Michael . He crashed into Red Sox catcher Carlton Fisk resulting in a fight with Munson punching Fisk in the face. The rivalry intensified in the 1970s with the fans too, as just a year later in 1974 at Fenway Park, Yankees first baseman Chris Chambliss was struck in the right arm with a dart thrown from the stands after hitting an RBI ground-rule double. Two years later, Yankees outfielder Lou Piniella would crash into Fisk feet first in an attempt to score in the sixth inning of a game at Yankee Stadium. The two benches cleared while Piniella and Fisk brawled at home plate. After the fight apparently died down and order appeared to be restored, Sox pitcher Bill Lee and Yankees third baseman Graig Nettles and center fielder Mickey Rivers began to exchange words, resulting in another fight. Lee suffered a separated left shoulder from the tilt and missed the next 51 games of the 1976 season. He would continue to pitch until 1982. The 1976 season saw the Yankees win the pennant, but lose to the Big Red Machine in the 1976 World Series , just like the Red Sox had done a year prior in the 1975 World Series in which Carlton Fisk hit his famous home run off of the left field foul pole at Fenway Park.

After the Yankees' loss to the Reds, owner George Steinbrenner committed to sign marquee free agent Reggie Jackson to help win a championship. The Yankees, Red Sox, and Baltimore Orioles would battle each other the entire year in the division race. The Yankees would win the division for the second year in a row, while the Orioles and Red Sox finished tied for second, 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 games behind the Yankees. Jackson's entry onto the Yankees initially had caused a lot of friction on them. In the middle game of what would prove to be a three-game series sweep by the Red Sox at Fenway Park, Yankees manager Billy Martin pulled Reggie Jackson off the field in mid-inning for failing to hustle on a ball hit to the outfield. The extremely angry and highly animated Martin had to be restrained by coaches Yogi Berra and Elston Howard from getting into a fistfight with Jackson in the dugout during the nationally televised game. Eventually, emotions calmed down for the season and the Yankees came together to recapture the pennant and defeat the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 1977 World Series , their first since 1962 .

In 1978, the Red Sox, led by Jim Rice , Carl Yastrzemski , Fred Lynn and catcher Carlton Fisk , and managed by future Yankees coach Don Zimmer , were looking good for the World Series for the second time in the decade. They led the Yankees in the standings by 14 games in mid-July, with less than three months to go in the regular season. The Yankees turned their season around just as the Red Sox started to collapse. By September 7, the Yankees had whittled down the 14-game deficit to only four games, just in time for a four-game series at Fenway Park in Boston. The Yankees won all four games in the series by a combined score of 42–9. This series became known as the "Boston Massacre". On September 16, the Yankees held a 3 + 1 ⁄ 2 -game lead over the Red Sox, but the Sox won 12 of their next 14 games to overcome that deficit and finish in a first-place tie with the Yankees. A tie-breaker game was scheduled in Boston to determine who would win the AL East pennant for 1978.

Boston pitted former Yankees pitcher Mike Torrez against the Yankees' Cy Young Award winner, Ron Guidry , who took a 24–3 record into the game. The Sox were beating Guidry 2–0 in the top of the seventh inning when light-hitting Yankees shortstop Bucky Dent hit a two-out, three-run home run over Fenway Park's Green Monster to take a 3–2 lead. It was only his fifth home run of the season. The Yankees later led 5–2 and held on to win 5–4 when Yastrzemski popped out with runners on first and third, ending the Red Sox' season. Yankees closer Goose Gossage notched his 27th save of the season. Gossage would later comment years later about how he was spat on at Fenway Park and had beer thrown in his face. "There is no rivalry in sports that rivals the Yankees – Red Sox...that playoff game in '78–it felt like the playoffs and World Series were exhibition games after that." The headline in The Boston Globe the next day summed it all up: "Destiny 5, Red Sox 4." New York went on to defeat the Kansas City Royals in the ALCS and the Los Angeles Dodgers in the World Series for their second straight championship.

The 1980s is the only decade in which neither the Yankees nor the Red Sox won a World Series. Although both teams went to a World Series during that decade, the Red Sox were not serious contenders in the Yankees' playoff years ( 1980 and 1981 ), but the Yankees seriously contended in the Red Sox' playoff years ( 1986 and 1988 ).

The Yankees lost the World Series in 1981 , while the Red Sox loss came in 1986 . Both times, the teams lost after being up 2–0 in their respective World Series. For the Yankees, the loss in 1981 marked the beginning of the team's demise and downfall in the 1980s and early 1990s. Despite the lack of championships, the rivalry between the teams did have some memorable highlights. Yankees left-hander Dave Righetti threw a no-hitter against the Red Sox at Yankee Stadium. One of the game's greatest hitters, Wade Boggs , struck out to end the game.

On October 4, 1986, Righetti once again made history against the Red Sox when he saved both games of a doubleheader against them, finishing the season with 46 saves, and breaking the major league record shared by Dan Quisenberry and Bruce Sutter . The record would stand until Bobby Thigpen saved 57 games for the Chicago White Sox in 1990, which would also be Righetti's last season with the Yankees. Righetti retained the single-season record for left-handers until 1993, when Randy Myers saved 53 games for the Chicago Cubs; Righetti still owns the AL record for left-handers.

Righetti's teammate, first baseman and defending American League MVP Don Mattingly , came into the last game batting .352, second in the league to Boston's Wade Boggs. With Boggs sitting out the game, Mattingly needed to go 6 for 6 to win the batting title. Although Mattingly would hit a home run in his first at bat and a double later on, he fell short and Boggs won the batting title. Mattingly would be named most outstanding player that year by the press, but fell short to Boggs' teammate Roger Clemens in the AL MVP voting.

Despite Righetti's pitching on the last day of the season, the Red Sox still won the division and marched on in the playoffs. The Red Sox faced the Yankees' cross-town rivals , the New York Mets , in the World Series. The New York Times called the series a "painful series". Newsday called it "woeful days for Yankee fans". Mike Lupica of the New York Daily News called the series "the World Series that is the Yankee nightmare". Both Newsday and The Boston Globe said there were Mets T-shirts saying "Steinbrenner's nightmare," referring to Yankees owner George Steinbrenner . John Powers of the Globe quoted Claire Smith, who covered the Yankees for the Hartford Courant , as having said "this really is the World Series of the nightmares".

In Game 6 of the World Series, Boston (leading the series 3–2) took a 5–3 lead in the top of the 10th inning. In the bottom half of the inning, Red Sox reliever Calvin Schiraldi retired the first two batters, putting the team within one out of winning the World Series. The Mets, however, scored three runs, tying the game on a wild pitch from Bob Stanley and winning it when Boston first baseman Bill Buckner allowed a ground ball hit by the Mets' Mookie Wilson to roll through his legs, scoring Ray Knight from second base. In Game 7, the Red Sox took an early 3–0 lead, only to lose 8–5. The collapses in the last two games prompted a series of articles by George Vecsey of The New York Times fueling speculation that the Red Sox were "cursed".

The 1987 season saw rivalry at the end of the season, as on September 29, Yankees' first baseman Don Mattingly set an MLB record by hitting his sixth grand slam home-run of the season against the Red Sox. The competitiveness of the teams continued the following year. Co-captains Ron Guidry and Willie Randolph had led the Yankees to first place two weeks after the All-Star break. On July 28, the Yankees fell out of first place, and the Red Sox won their second division title in three years. Boston went on to face the Oakland Athletics in the 1988 American League Championship Series , but would end up getting swept.

In the early to mid-1990s, the two teams were seldom equally good. The Yankees had the worst record in the American League when the Red Sox won their division title in 1990. In 1992, both teams finished at or near the bottom of the AL East.

In 1990, Boston Globe columnist Dan Shaughnessy wrote a book titled The Curse of the Bambino , criticizing the Red Sox for the sale of Babe Ruth, and publicized the curse. When the Red Sox were at Yankee Stadium during a weekend in September 1990, Yankees fans started to chant "1918!" to taunt the Red Sox, reminding them of the last time they won a World Series. Each time the Red Sox were at Yankee Stadium afterward, demeaning chants of "1918!" echoed through the stadium. Yankees fans also taunted the Red Sox with signs saying "1918!", "CURSE OF THE BAMBINO", pictures of Babe Ruth, and wearing "1918!" T-shirts each time they were at the Stadium. Other teams would not pick up the "1918!" chant; it was only at Yankee Stadium where the chants of "1918!" were heard.

On June 6, 1990, before a Yankees–Red Sox game at Fenway Park, Bucky Dent was fired as manager of the Yankees, making Fenway Park the scene of his worst moment in baseball, although he had his greatest moment there. Although Red Sox fans felt retribution as Dent was fired on their field, and players on the Yankees, including former Red Sox catcher Rick Cerone and Mattingly felt Dent was used as a scapegoat, both sides were shaken to the core by the firing and called it an outrage, blasting Steinbrenner for firing Dent in Boston. Dan Shaughnessy said he should "have waited until the Yankees got to Baltimore" to fire Dent. He said that "if Dent had been fired in Seattle or Milwaukee, this would have been just another event in an endless line of George's jettisons. But it happened in Boston and the nightly news had its hook." He also said that "the firing was only special because...it's the first time a Yankees manager...was purged on the ancient Indian burial grounds of the Back Bay." Yankees television analyst Tony Kubek blasted the firing in a harsh, angry way. At the beginning of the broadcast of the game on MSG Network , he said to Yankees television play-by-play announcer Dewayne Staats , "George Steinbrenner...mishandled this. You don't take a Bucky Dent (at) the site of one of the greatest home runs in Yankee history and fire him and make it a media circus for the Boston Red Sox." He then stared defiantly on camera and said to Steinbrenner, "You don't do it by telephone, either, George. You do it face to face, eyeball to eyeball...If you really are a winner, you should not have handled this like a loser." He then said, angrily, "George, you're a bully and a coward." He then said that "What all this does, it just wrecks George Steinbrenner's credibility with his players, with the front office and in baseball more than it already is–if that's possible. It was just mishandled."

The 1993 season saw long-time Red Sox fan favorite Wade Boggs defect to the Yankees after eleven seasons with Boston. Later in September 1993, the Yankees defeated Boston at Yankee Stadium via a last-moment reprieve. Trailing 3–1, Mike Stanley 's apparent fly out with two outs in the ninth was nullified by a fan running onto the field prior to the pitch being thrown. The umpire had called time and when play resumed, Stanley singled. The Yankees would rally to score three runs and win on a Mattingly single.

The Yankees' 1980s demise and downfall continued into the early 1990s and was at its frustrating peak in 1994, when they finished with the best record in the American League in a season that was prematurely halted by the 1994–95 Major League Baseball strike , which left New York sports fans disappointed that Mattingly had not played in a postseason despite being poised to do so that year. At that time, he led active players in both games played and at-bats without participating in a postseason game. Throughout October, the news media added to the embarrassment when they often made references to dates that games in the World Series would have been played. That year, the Yankees and Red Sox would have finished the season against each other at Fenway Park. Both managers, Buck Showalter of the Yankees and Butch Hobson of the Red Sox, who made their managerial debuts against each other, were fired as a result of or during the strike.

The strike was the harbinger of the 1995 season for the Yankees. Although the Red Sox jumped out to a fast start and finished the season in first place, the Yankees were not serious contenders for the division title. With the Yankees clinching the inaugural American League Wild Card on the last day of the season, the Yankees and Red Sox reached the post-season in the same season for the first time. Before the postseason began, Mattingly contemplated about the first-ever playoff series in the rivalry, saying, "That would be pretty cool. It wouldn't hurt the rivalry any. There'd be a few deaths...just kidding". Both teams lost in separate ALDS series, with the Red Sox being swept by the Cleveland Indians and the Yankees losing in five games to the Seattle Mariners . For the Yankees, the loss led to another post-strike fallout: both Showalter and general manager Gene Michael were fired as a result of the loss. Similarly, the firing of Michael as Yankees manager and the loss in the 1981 World Series were fallouts from the strike that year . In fact, the 1981 strike was antecedence to the Yankees' demise and downfall of the 1980s and 1990s and the strike in 1994 was part of that demise.

A year after captain Don Mattingly's retirement in 1995, the Yankees won the 1996 World Series . It was their first in 18 years and the first of former Red Sox player Wade Boggs' career. Boggs celebrated the victory with a memorable moment of jumping on the horse of a NYPD officer during the celebration.

The Yankees had one of the greatest seasons in baseball history in 1998. The Yankees won a then-AL record 114 games and the season culminated in a win over the San Diego Padres in the 1998 World Series . The Red Sox, too, made the playoffs in 1998, but as a Wild Card, they did not seriously contend for the division title. They lost their ALDS .

About four months after victory, the Yankees traded fan favorite David Wells to the Toronto Blue Jays for Roger Clemens, a fan favorite with the Red Sox between 1984 and 1996. Clemens was coming off two consecutive season with the Blue Jays where he had won both the pitching triple crown and the Cy Young Award in both 1997 and 1998.

Once the 1999 season started, a moment of peace occurred between the fans. Yankees manager Joe Torre returned to Fenway Park for his first game following a battle with prostate cancer . While the managers were exchanging lineup cards, the Boston crowd gave Torre a long standing ovation, to which he tipped his cap. Good relations were seen during the All-Star Game at Fenway Park. Yankees manager Joe Torre, manager for the American League team, replaced starting shortstop Nomar Garciaparra of the Red Sox with Derek Jeter . Garciaparra received a standing ovation from the fans after Jeter came in to replace him (they also embraced each other at this time). Later in the game, when he came to bat, Jeter gave Garciaparra a tribute by mimicking his batting stance. Nine years later , in a similar fashion, Red Sox manager Terry Francona managed the American League team at the All-Star Game at Yankee Stadium, in the stadium's final season.

On September 10, 1999, Chili Davis ' second-inning home run was the only hit by the Yankees against Pedro Martínez , who struck out 17 Yankees – the most strikeouts against a Yankees team ever in a nine inning game. Martínez retired the last 22 batters after giving up the home run, including striking out eight of the final nine batters. The teams finished first and second in their division and both made the playoffs in the same season. This led to the very first post-season meeting in the longtime rivalry.

In 1999, the Yankees and Red Sox faced each other for the first time in the ALCS . The Yankees were the defending World Series champions, while Boston had not appeared in the ALCS since 1990 . The Yankees won Game 1 on a 10th-inning walk-off home run by Bernie Williams off Boston reliever Rod Beck . Intensity built up due to this historic, first-ever postseason meeting between the two longtime rivals. The Yankees would win the first two games at home with 7th-inning comebacks.

The lone bright spot for the Red Sox came in Game 3 at Fenway Park, in what had been a much anticipated pitching match-up of former Red Sox star Roger Clemens, who was now with the Yankees, and Boston ace Pedro Martínez. Martínez struck out twelve and did not allow a run through seven innings of work; Clemens was hit hard, giving up five earned runs and only lasting two innings of a 13–1 Red Sox victory. The Yankees rebounded to win Games 4 and 5, clinching the American League pennant and advancing to the World Series , where they swept the Atlanta Braves . The loss to Pedro Martínez was the Yankees' only postseason loss, as the team went 11–1.

The following year at Fenway Park, the Yankees beat the Red Sox, 22–1, handing Boston its most lopsided home loss ever. The Yankees scored 16 total runs in the 8th and 9th innings. The Yankees lost 15 of their final 18 games that season and finished with a record of 87–74, but the Red Sox failed to catch up and finished 2.5 games out of first to lose another division title to the Yankees. Despite having the lowest winning percentage of any postseason qualifier in 2000, the Yankees won their third consecutive World Series and 26th overall, in the first Subway Series since 1956, over their cross-town rivals , the New York Mets, in 5 games.

A year later, David Cone , one of the key players in the then-most recent Yankees dynasty, started for the Red Sox against the Yankees at Yankee Stadium to the sound of a standing ovation despite playing for the arch-rivals. Cone would later take part in another notable game later that year when he went up against newly acquired Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina . Mussina had come within one strike of pitching a perfect game against the Red Sox at Fenway Park. Carl Everett 's 9th-inning single was the only baserunner allowed by Mussina in a 1–0 Yankees win. Coincidentally, David Cone was the last Yankees pitcher to throw a perfect game, in 1999.

On September 10, the two teams had a game against each other rained out. The next day, the country saw one of its biggest tragedies bring both sides together. Following the terrorist attacks on New York City's Twin World Trade Center Towers (which ironically involved two passenger jets departing from Boston), Boston fans displayed signs saying "Boston Loves New York" in a rare moment of peace between the two sides of the rivalry. On September 23, the Yankees' home field hosted a memorial service titled, "Prayer for America". The warm feeling of solidarity would once again be short-lived as just prior to the 2003 season, Red Sox President Larry Lucchino labeled New York Yankees the "Evil Empire" after Cuban free agent José Contreras opted to sign with the Yankees instead of the Red Sox. The new ownership group had made it their personal mission to win a championship.

Major League Baseball changed its scheduling format beginning in 2001, further intensifying division matchups throughout the league. The new "unbalanced schedule" allowed for additional games in each season between divisional rivals, replacing additional series with teams outside the division. Due to the change, the Red Sox and Yankees now played each other 18–19 times each season. The scheduling drew criticism both when it was enacted and after the fact, with some analysts even positing the unbalanced schedule hurt intra-divisional play.

In 2002, the Red Sox asked the Yankees for permission to interview one of George Steinbrenner's assistants, former Yankees general manager Gene Michael , for their vacant general manager position, but Steinbrenner denied their request. Boston Red Sox then hired Theo Epstein , a protégé of Red Sox President and CEO Larry Lucchino , as general manager, and at 28 years old, he was the youngest general manager in baseball history.

Both teams would face off in the ALCS once again in 2003. Entering the series, the Red Sox were the favorites to reach the 2003 World Series and The New York Times had endorsed a showdown between the Red Sox and the Chicago Cubs, the latter of whom had not been to the World Series since 1945 and had not won a championship since 1908 .

Due to the unbalanced schedule, when Boston forced the ALCS to a full seven games, the seventh game set a major league record for the rivalry between the two teams: it marked the first time two major league teams have played more than 25 games against each other over the course of a single season.

In the top of the fourth inning of Game 3 of the ALCS at Fenway Park, Red Sox starting pitcher Pedro Martínez hit Yankees batter Karim García , prompting an argument between the two players, which ended with both teams clearing the benches but no punches being thrown. In the bottom half of the inning, a pitch from Roger Clemens to Manny Ramírez was high and inside, and a brawl ensued. Ramírez swore at Clemens for the pitch. Yankees bench coach Don Zimmer, then 72 years old, and who had been the manager of the "doomed" 1978 Boston Red Sox, charged at Martínez; the pitcher grabbed Zimmer by the head and swung him to the ground. Later, midway through the ninth inning, García and Yankees pitcher Jeff Nelson fought with a Fenway Park groundskeeper, Paul Williams, in the bullpen. Two Boston Police officers issued a report saying Nelson and García engaged in "an unprovoked attack" on Williams and summonses would be sought for the two New York Yankees for assault and battery. After reviewing the incident, MLB Commissioner Bud Selig said he was "very disappointed" by the behavior of the participants and fined Martínez $50,000, Ramírez $25,000, García $10,000, and Zimmer $5,000.

In Game 7 at Yankee Stadium, the Red Sox held a 5–2 lead through seven and a half innings due to an ineffective start by Roger Clemens, but the Yankees remained in the game because of three shutout innings of relief by Mike Mussina in his first career relief appearance. After Boston Red Sox starter Pedro Martínez gave up a run in the eighth, manager Grady Little visited the mound but elected to leave a tiring Martínez to complete the inning. Martínez then gave up a ground-rule double to Hideki Matsui , and Yankees catcher Jorge Posada blooped a double into center field that drove in two runners and tied the game. The game went into extra innings and in the bottom of the eleventh inning, leadoff hitter Aaron Boone , grandson of Ray Boone , a (retired) longtime scout with the Red Sox, hit a solo home run off of Tim Wakefield to left field, ending the game and the series, giving the Yankees their 39th American League pennant. The Long Island, New York, newspaper Newsday went to the press before the game was over, and thinking Boston would win the game, editorialized as to what was wrong with the Yankees, and why they had lost the ALCS to the Red Sox. In a postgame interview, Red Sox first baseman Kevin Millar described the emotions in the Red Sox locker room: "It was like we were all back in high school, like we'd all just gotten beat in the state playoffs, and everyone was going to graduate.... When you're a teenager and you lose the big football game, that's when you see guys cry uncontrollably. You don't [usually] see that much at this level." The Yankees would lose the World Series that year to the Florida Marlins in six games.

Two days later, the Red Sox fired Grady Little. People blamed him for the Game 7 loss, claiming he left Martínez in for too long.

In an effort to build up their lineup, the Red Sox set up a potential deal that would send Texas Rangers shortstop and reigning AL MVP Alex Rodriguez to Boston and Manny Ramírez and other players to Texas. The deal eventually fell through after Rodriguez indicated he would not go against the MLBPA , which opposed a proposed renegotiation that would have potentially reduced Rodríguez's earnings in the later years of his contract. A freak off-season basketball injury to Aaron Boone, just months removed from his historic home run, had Yankees management looking at possible options to replace him. Despite being courted by Boston for nearly three months, Rodriguez was traded to New York.

That year, the Red Sox won an eventful season series against the Yankees, 11–8. A 13-inning comeback win for the Yankees on July 1 was punctuated by a catch from Jeter, who ran and dove into the stands at full speed and came out with facial lacerations when Trot Nixon hit a pop up in an area deep behind third base. On July 24, Jason Varitek shoved his glove into the face of Rodriguez after Rodriguez was hit by a pitch from Bronson Arroyo , causing a bench-clearing brawl. Though he was ejected (along with Rodriguez) from the game following the incident, the moment sparked Boston to an 11–10 come-from-behind victory. After a 6–4 loss on September 24 in which he gave up 5 runs, Pedro Martínez told media "I just tip my hat and call the Yankees my daddy". This would lead Yankees fans to taunt Pedro with "who's your Daddy" chants for the remainder of his career. The Red Sox finished second to the Yankees in the AL East for the seventh straight season. Both teams would advance to the ALCS for the second straight year.

After the melodrama of the 2003 ALCS, a rematch in 2004 was hotly anticipated. Yankees general manager Brian Cashman said "I think Boston...really are...a mirror image of us in terms of...aggressiveness and desire to win". Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina summarized the buildup: "This is what everyone was hoping for...it's a rematch of last year, with the best two teams in the American League".

The Yankees won the first three games of the series, including a 19–8 rout in Game 3. No team in the history of baseball had ever won a best-of-seven series after being down 3–0. Entering the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 4 at Fenway Park, Yankees reliever Mariano Rivera was attempting to close out a 4–3 lead. But after a lead-off walk to Kevin Millar , pinch-runner Dave Roberts stole second and came around to score on an RBI single by Bill Mueller . Boston won the game in the bottom of the 12th inning on a home run by David Ortiz . Game 5 featured another extra-inning Boston comeback, as the Red Sox tied the game in the 8th inning and won it in the 14th on a single hit by Ortiz that drove in Damon from second. In Game 6, Curt Schilling, who tore a tendon sheath in his right ankle during the ALDS against Anaheim , pitched seven innings of one-run ball. Schilling's tendon had been sutured to his ankle to relieve the discomfort and was given local anesthetic and painkillers for the game. During the game, his sock started to absorb the blood from his freshly sutured ankle, and "the bloody sock" instantly became an indelible image of the dramatic series. A controversial call was made when Alex Rodriguez was called out after he intentionally slapped the ball out of Arroyo's hand while running to first base. Boston held on to win the contest, 4–2. They then completed their historic comeback with a blowout win in Game 7 by a score of 10–3. The New York Yankees blowing the 3–0 lead has been considered the biggest collapse in the history of baseball.

The Red Sox would go on to win their first World Series championship in 86 years, completing a four-game sweep of the St. Louis Cardinals in the 2004 World Series .

At Yankee Stadium on April 3, 2005, the teams' first meeting since the 2004 ALCS, Yankees fans started new taunts, saying "The Curse of 1918 is finally over (86 years). Let the new curse 2090 begin." They also projected the next Red Sox championship with signs saying "1918-2004-2090." A week later, the Red Sox received their World Series rings at Fenway Park before they played the Yankees. All of the Yankees went to the top step of the dugout to applaud their rivals' accomplishment. During the announcement of the lineups, Red Sox fans reciprocated by giving Yankees closer Mariano Rivera, who had struggled against the Red Sox in the previous year's ALCS, a loud standing ovation , despite their booing of Alex Rodriguez . Rivera laughed and tipped his cap. In New York, the YES Network , the Yankees television network, declined to broadcast it. Instead, a fixed camera shot was focused tightly on correspondent Kimberly Jones as she described in general terms the events surrounding her; afterwards, YES was criticized for the move. The Red Sox won the game 8–1.

The Red Sox acquired starting pitcher Josh Beckett , who pitched a complete-game shutout for the Florida Marlins against the Yankees to end the 2003 World Series, in the 2005–2006 offseason. The Yankees would follow with their own off-season acquisition of former Red Sox outfielder Johnny Damon , a fan-favorite during his four years in Boston. Damon returned to Fenway Park the following May to a mix of cheers and boos as he tipped his helmet to the fans.

The Yankees completed a five-game sweep of the Red Sox at Fenway Park, evoking memories of 1978's "Boston Massacre". The Yankees pushed their division lead from 1 + 1 ⁄ 2 games up to 6 + 1 ⁄ 2 games over the second place Sox. Boston Globe columnist Dan Shaughnessy dubbed it the "Son of Massacre." The second game of the series, which the Yankees won 14–11, took four hours and 45 minutes to complete, making it the longest nine-inning game in MLB history. Months after the Yankees loss in the 2006 ALDS and Torre's decision to drop a struggling Alex Rodriguez to 8th in the lineup, Rodriguez in an interview with Sports Illustrated , claimed that he had preferred to go to the Red Sox before being traded to the Yankees. The incident would be one of contention between Torre and Rodriguez as noted in Torre's book, The Yankee Years .

During the third inning of a 2007 game at Fenway Park, Ramírez, J. D. Drew , Mike Lowell , and Jason Varitek hit four consecutive home runs off Yankees pitcher Chase Wright , powering a comeback from a three-run deficit and completing a three-game sweep of the Yankees at Fenway Park for the first time since 1990. By May, after long speculation about what team he would play for after retirement, Roger Clemens chose to return to the Yankees as opposed to the Red Sox (where he started his career) or the Houston Astros (his hometown and last team he played for). Clemens helped the Yankees overcome a 14 + 1 ⁄ 2 -game deficit in the standings in late May to roar back to reach the playoffs again, however, this was not enough to win the division. On September 28, Boston won the AL East after a win against the Minnesota Twins and a loss by the Yankees against the Baltimore Orioles . This was the first AL East Championship for the Red Sox since 1995, ending the Yankees' nine-year reign in the division.

The Red Sox went on to sweep the Colorado Rockies in the World Series . Series MVP Mike Lowell remarks, upon receiving his trophy, that "the Red Sox are expected to win." Controversy erupted during the eighth inning of the final game when Alex Rodriguez's agent Scott Boras announced that Rodriguez had decided to opt out of his contract, in what was seen by many as an attempt by Boras to overshadow the series.

The 2007–08 off-season showed a war of words between management of both teams. Boston general manager Theo Epstein called Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina a "bad apple" for complaining about the Yankees' 2004 trip to Japan as the Red Sox were gearing up for their own trip there. Epstein claimed that Mussina had used it as a crutch during the season. Mussina retorted back saying "Yea, we used it as a crutch to win the division!" Later that month, Hank Steinbrenner , who had taken a bigger role with the Yankees operation from his father George, responded in a feisty manner to the popularity of Red Sox Nation in The New York Times supplemental Play Magazine : " ' Red Sox Nation?' What a bunch of (expletive) that is. That was a creation of the Red Sox and ESPN , which is filled with Red Sox fans. Go anywhere in America and you won't see Red Sox hats and jackets, you'll see Yankee hats and jackets. This is a Yankee country. We're going to put the Yankees back on top and restore the universe to order." In response, Red Sox principal owner John W. Henry inducted Hank Steinbrenner into Red Sox Nation. Steinbrenner went on to praise Henry's handling of the Red Sox and said they would always be competitive under him.

In the 2008–09 off-season, first baseman Mark Teixeira signed an eight year, $180 million contract with the Yankees. Tony Massarotti of The Boston Globe summed up his feelings by calling it a "kick in the pants".

In August 2009, the Yankees defeated the Red Sox, 20–11, in which the total runs scored (31) was the most combined runs scored in a game in the history of the rivalry.

Both teams made the playoffs in 2009. During the ALDS , the Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins to face the Los Angeles Angels who had knocked out the Red Sox. The Yankees beat the Angels and went on defeat the Philadelphia Phillies in the 2009 World Series , 4–2, to win their 27th World Series title in their first year in the new Yankee Stadium. Former Red Sox pitcher Pedro Martínez was the losing pitcher for the Phillies in the deciding Game 6.

In the final series of the 2010 season at Fenway Park, the Red Sox, struggling to get out of third place for much of the season, played the role of spoiler, knocking the Yankees out of first place in the American League East, relegating them to the wild-card for 2010.

In 2011, the Red Sox went 12–6 against the Yankees, including beating Yankees ace CC Sabathia four times during the season and sweeping two three-game series at Yankee Stadium , the first two series of three games of more where the Yankees have been swept at home since it opened in 2009. Critics and writers forecasted overwhelmingly that the Red Sox would win the 2011 World Series . The Red Sox spent a great deal to build the team in the off-season, and were about to sell at least two Red Sox as Most Valuable Player candidates by mid season. Following a disastrous first month, the Red Sox climbed in the standings. The Yankees claimed the AL East crown after the Red Sox's September struggles left them battling for the wild-card with the Rays, with whom they went into the season's final game tied. On September 28, the Tampa Bay Rays staged a dramatic comeback from 7–0 to win 8–7 over the Yankees in the 12th inning. Only three minutes earlier, Red Sox closer Jonathan Papelbon blew a 3–2 lead over the Orioles in the bottom of the 9th inning, handing a 4–3 walk-off victory to the Orioles. The Rays claimed the AL Wild Card and eliminated the Red Sox from the postseason. It marked the first time in baseball history that a 9-game lead had been blown in September, becoming the worst collapse in baseball history. Dan Shaughnessy of The Boston Globe said that "the greatest choke in baseball history...feels like revenge for 2004 and 2007 ."

The Red Sox hired outspoken manager Bobby Valentine , who had previously lost to the Yankees in the 2000 World Series during his tenure with the New York Mets , to take Francona's place. After his signing, Valentine immediately inserted himself into the rivalry when he said he hated the Yankees.

On the series of April 20–22, 2012, the Red Sox celebrated the 100th anniversary of Fenway Park against the Yankees, who they played to open up the park. Both teams wore their 1912 uniforms on April 20, which the Yankees won 6–2. The Yankees came back from down, 9–0, to win, 15–9, the next day, the largest deficit they have ever overcome. They won the season series 13–5, their best record against the Red Sox since 2001, when they also went 13–5 against them, and swept the final three-game series of the season at Yankee Stadium to clinch the AL East while the Red Sox finished last in the division for the first time since 1992 with their worst record since 1965. Valentine was fired soon after. Later in 2012, the Yankees acquired 2004 ALCS Game 7 winner Derek Lowe . He was the latest member of the 2004 team to later play for the Yankees. After the 2012 season, Kevin Youkilis , who the Red Sox traded to the Chicago White Sox earlier in the season, signed with the Yankees as a free agent. He had previously clashed with Joba Chamberlain when he was with Boston.

On April 16, 2013, the Yankees showed support to the victims of the Boston Marathon bombing , which occurred the day before, by holding a moment of silence prior to their game against the Arizona Diamondbacks . Following the third inning, the team further paid tribute by playing " Sweet Caroline ", which is known as Fenway Park's traditional song, over the Yankee Stadium's loudspeakers. At the end of the year, the Red Sox took the regular season series over the Yankees 13–6. The Red Sox finished the season with the best record in the American League and went on to defeat the St. Louis Cardinals in the 2013 World Series to win their eighth World Series title, while the Yankees failed to make the playoffs. In 2014 the Yankees acquired Stephen Drew in exchange for Kelly Johnson in the first trade between the two teams since 1997. Both teams missed the playoffs in 2014, which was the first time in the wild card era.

To start the 2015 edition of the rivalry, the first game at Yankee Stadium on April 10 went into extra innings ended up being one of the longest games ever played – at 6 hours and 49 minutes – going 19 innings, with the Yankees tying the game three times in the bottom of the 9th, 14th, and 16th. The Red Sox won the game, 6–5. The Yankees won the 2015 season series 11–8, including going 7–2 at Fenway Park. Towards the end of the 2016 season in September, the Yankees headed to Fenway Park trailing the first place Red Sox by only four games. The Yankees ended up getting swept and blew late-inning leads in three of the four games, including giving up five runs in the ninth inning of the first game. The sweep has been dubbed "Boston Massacre II" in reference to the 1978 four-game sweep of the Red Sox by the Yankees at Fenway.

On September 28, Yankees first baseman and former Red Sox draft pick Mark Teixeira hit the final home run of his career, which was a walk-off grand slam off Boston Red Sox pitcher Joe Kelly . It was the first game-ending home run Teixeira had ever hit in a regular-season game. It was also the first – and as of 2018, the only – walk-off grand slam hit by any player at the new Yankee Stadium .

In 2017, the Red Sox won the division by two games, forcing the Yankees into the Wild Card Game. However, both teams lost in the postseason to the eventual World Series champion Houston Astros .

For the third time in the history of the rivalry (the previous two were 1930 and 1992), both teams had new managers to start the 2018 season. The Yankees hired Aaron Boone and the Red Sox hired Alex Cora , both former players of their respective teams. During an early-season game, a brawl erupted between both benches after Yankees first baseman Tyler Austin charged Red Sox pitcher Joe Kelly for throwing at him twice in response to Austin's slide at second base earlier in the game. It became a trending topic on Twitter and the MLB's YouTube channel video of the incident became one of the most viewed, and social media commentators saw the brawl as a spark of a reignited rivalry between the two teams. By the end of the 2018 regular season, both teams qualified for the postseason and both reached the 100-win mark. It was the first time that both teams won at least 100 games in the same season and, along with the Houston Astros , the first time the American League had three 100-game winners. Following the Yankees' victory in the AL Wild Card Game , the two faced each other in the 2018 ALDS . The Red Sox won the series 3–1, taking Games 3 and 4 in Yankee Stadium by a combined score of 20–4. Just like in the April brawl, this series became a Twitter trending topic.

In May 2018, MLB announced that the teams would play a two-game series during the 2019 season at London Stadium , in the first of a two-year deal to play regular-season games at the venue. The 2019 MLB London Series was the first time that the two sides have played each other in regular season play outside of either New York or Boston, and was also the first MLB regular-season games were played in Europe. The Yankees won both games in an offense heavy showing in which both teams combined for 50 runs scored in just 18 innings. The Yankees also won four of the five remaining series, pushing the Sox out of contention.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic , the 2020 season was shortened to 60 games and ten meetings between the rivals, with the Yankees winning nine out of the ten games. The Yankees would finish the season 33–27, good for second place in the AL East, qualifying for the postseason, where they would eventually lose to the Tampa Bay Rays in the American League Division Series.

On January 25, 2021, the Yankees sent relief pitcher and New York City native Adam Ottavino , prospect Frank German, and cash considerations to the Red Sox for a player to be named later and cash considerations. This was the first trade between the two teams since 2014 and third since 1997. In 2021, the Red Sox acquired reliever Garrett Whitlock from the Yankees after they declined to protect him in the Rule 5 Draft.

The 2021 season series saw the Red Sox win the first seven meetings as they and the Tampa Bay Rays battled for the AL East lead. The Yankees were in the mix for a Wild Card spot. However, New York won nine of the final twelve meetings as Boston fell several games behind Tampa Bay. This put the Yankees and Red Sox squarely in the Wild Card race. On the final day of the season, each team was 91–70 and could clinch a Wild Card spot with a win. New York defeated Tampa Bay, while Boston defeated the Washington Nationals , setting up a meeting in the Wild Card game at Fenway Park. On October 5, the Red Sox beat the Yankees in the 2021 AL Wild Card Game , 6–2.

The Red Sox and Yankees faced off in the 2025 AL Wild Card Series . After the Red Sox won the first game, the Yankees won the final two games of the series.

Using Facebook Like button data, Ben Blatt of the Harvard College Sports Analysis Collective found in 2012 that Red Sox fans are east of the New York State – Vermont / Massachusetts border, and Yankees fans are west. Blatt wrote, "I had thought that it was possible that Red Sox Nation might extend into northern New York or Yankees territory might extend into Vermont. This turned out not to be the case." Connecticut divides support between the two teams; he found that 56.6% of Facebook users in Hartford , often cited as being on the border between the two teams' fans, supported the Yankees. While Blatt found that identifying an exact border within the state was impossible, Guilford and Middletown are almost exactly divided, with 50.7% in each city supporting the Yankees.

There have been occasions of arrests due to violence over the rivalry. In May 2008, a Yankees fan in Nashua, New Hampshire , was arrested and charged with reckless second-degree murder outside a bar, which resulted from an argument over the rivalry. Later in 2008, a man driving a car with New York license plates in Massachusetts was pulled from his car and savagely beaten because locals suspected the man of being a Yankees fan. During the final series of the 2010 season, Boston Police arrested a Yankees fan for stabbing a Red Sox fan over an argument about the rivalry.

Don Mattingly had appeared in public service announcements airing on the Spike TV network advocating fathers to spend time with their children as part of the "True Dads" campaign to encourage men to take an active role in their children's lives. Mattingly jokes at the end of the commercial about the impatience of one of the characters in the commercial by calling him a Red Sox fan.

On April 13, 2008, rumors of a construction worker burying a Red Sox jersey in the concrete of the new Yankee Stadium were verified. The worker, identified as Gino Castignoli, buried a David Ortiz jersey in what would become a service corridor in the hopes of cursing the new stadium. After extracting the jersey from underneath two feet of concrete, Yankees' President Randy Levine indicated that the shirt would be donated to the Jimmy Fund to be auctioned for the charity long associated with the Red Sox. Whatever curse was intended failed to bear fruit with the Yankees winning the World Series in their first year at the new stadium.

On October 23, 2007, former New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani , who is a Yankees fan, said at a New Hampshire event for his presidential campaign that he would support the Red Sox over the Colorado Rockies in the 2007 World Series , which started the following day; the Red Sox went on to sweep the Rockies in four games. Giuliani justified his support of the Red Sox by proclaiming he was a fan of American League baseball. The following day, the New York Post and New York Daily News printed doctored photos of Giuliani as a Red Sox fan on their covers with the headlines "RED COAT" and "TRAITOR!" respectively. Topps parodied this in a 2008 baseball card altered to depict Giuliani on the field with the Red Sox as the team celebrated their 2007 World Series championship.

A month later, he was asked about his support for the Red Sox by one of the questioners in a Republican Presidential Debate . In response to the mayor's answer, former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney , who was in office during the Red Sox 2004 win, claimed that all Americans are united in hatred of the Yankees.

Giuliani's successor, Michael Bloomberg , was born and raised in Massachusetts and grew up a Red Sox fan, but later switched his allegiance to the Yankees after assuming office. Bloomberg's successor, Bill de Blasio , who was born in New York City but primarily grew up in Cambridge, Massachusetts , openly supported the Red Sox World Series run during his 2013 campaign, winning the general election by a huge margin.

During the 2010 special Senate election in Massachusetts , Martha Coakley , the Democratic candidate and state Attorney General , faced a mild backlash for deriding Curt Schilling as "another Yankee fan" on a local radio show, after Schilling endorsed Coakley's Republican opponent, state senator Scott Brown . Many critics alleged that Coakley's apparent unfamiliarity with Schilling demonstrated a lack of awareness toward her Massachusetts constituents. Schilling responded, "I've been called a lot of things...but never, I mean never, could anyone make the mistake of calling me a Yankee fan. Well, check that; if you didn't know what the hell is going on in your own state maybe you could." Brown, who had polled as much as 30 points behind Coakley a month before the election, had seen a late surge in support prior to Coakley's comments and would eventually win a come from behind victory against her in the election.

In 2002, when the NFL 's New England Patriots held their victory celebration after winning their first Super Bowl; linebacker Larry Izzo fired up the crowd, chanting "Yankees suck!" The chant would become a fixture of Patriots Super Bowl victory rallies following their victories in Super Bowls XXXVIII in 2004 and XXXIX in 2005, which were sandwiched around the Red Sox 2004 World Series win. Dan Shaughnessy wrote about the chant: "Can you imagine a Giants or a Jets celebration in New York City in which a New York player would take the time to chant, 'Red Sox suck? ' " Shaughnessy opined that should such a thing occur, it would be more likely at a Jets celebration, as a Giants celebration, like those of the Mets and the Rangers , would be more likely to feature such chants made in reference to the Philadelphia teams, as one of the Giants' primary rivalries is with the Philadelphia Eagles .

The rivalry was played out during Super Bowl XLII in February 2008, as it was a showdown between football teams from each metropolitan area, the New York Giants and the New England Patriots. The Giants defeated the Patriots in what was considered one of the greatest upsets in Super Bowl history. After the game Giants fans chanted "18 and 1! 18 and 1!", reminiscent of the infamous "1918" chant, towards Patriots fans as they left the stadium. (Had they won the game, the Patriots would have become the first NFL team to ever finish with a 19–0 record, and only the second NFL team since the 1972 Miami Dolphins to have a perfect season.) Giants fans called this revenge for the Red Sox comeback in 2004. The Giants and Patriots faced off again in Super Bowl XLVI ; with the Giants once again defeating the Patriots. Dan Shaughnessy's piece in The Boston Globe on the Giants victory over the Patriots was headlined, "History Repeats."

During the 2008 NBA Finals between the Boston Celtics and the Los Angeles Lakers , movie director Spike Lee , a season ticket holder of the New York Knicks , wore a Yankees jersey and cap at Game 3 of the Finals in Los Angeles. Lee sat behind the Boston bench while loudly cheering for the Lakers , though he has a friendship with Ray Allen of the Celtics .

For the 2010 NHL Winter Classic outdoor ice hockey game held at Fenway Park, Boston Bruins then-backup goaltender Tuukka Rask had artwork on his "special event" goalie mask's upper front area depicting a roaring bear with a ripped New York Yankees home "pinstripe" jersey falling from its lower jaw.

In 2011, NBA star LeBron James worked a deal with Red Sox owner John Henry to take partial ownership of Henry's soccer subsidiary Liverpool Football Club of the Premier League . James was criticized in the New York media for spurning New York due to his being a purported Yankees fan.

On June 27, 2011, the Yankees/Red Sox feud spilled into the world of professional wrestling when CM Punk was cutting a promo against Boston native John Cena . CM Punk went on to call John Cena a hypocrite for reasons that were unfolding in their respective storyline and said that John Cena had become the very thing he had despised in the wrestling business. He concluded this promo by calling Cena the "New York Yankees". Cena then punched Punk for comparing him to his home team's famed rivals. [Punk:] "What you've lost sight of is what you are, and what you are is what you hate. You're the 10-time WWE Champion! You're the man! You, like the Red Sox, like Boston, are no longer the underdog! You're a dynasty. You are what you hate. You have become the New York Yankees!" [John Cena immediately punches Punk, who scoots out of the ring, grabs the contract, and goes up the ramp. Points respectively to Vince McMahon and John Cena] "You're Steinbrenner, and you might as well be Jeter! Mr. 3000, I'm the underdog!" [ citation needed ]

As the owners of the Yankees are partnered with Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan , owner of Manchester City F.C. through City Football Group , both groups have joint-ownership of Major League Soccer franchise New York City FC . With Red Sox being sisters of Liverpool F.C. through their Fenway Sports Group ownership, the 2014 International Champions Cup soccer game between English clubs Manchester City and Liverpool at Yankee Stadium carried a new angle of the Yankees and Red Sox rivalry. Liverpool defeated Manchester City on the day in a penalty shoot-out, after tying 0–0. Both teams have since developed their own rivalry in their home country, which also stems from the inter-city rivalry between Manchester and Liverpool that originated in the 19th century through the Industrial Revolution .

Rivalries between other New York sports teams and other Boston sports teams have been attributed to the Yankees–Red Sox rivalry. For example, some have pointed out the connections between this rivalry and those of the New York Jets and the New England Patriots in the NFL and the New York Knicks and the Boston Celtics in the NBA.

Currently, the MLB on Fox studio team includes Alex Rodriguez and Derek Jeter (former Yankees players), as well as David Ortiz (former Red Sox player), which has led to some playful disrespect and pranks involving the rivalry.

Prior to the 2021 MLB at Field of Dreams game, Rodriguez and Ortiz recreated the “have a catch” scene in which Ortiz refused to play catch with Rodriguez due to the rivalry.

Following Game 1 of the 2022 American League Division Series between the Yankees and Cleveland Guardians , Rodriguez pranked Ortiz during the post-game coverage by tricking him into wearing a Yankees helmet rather than a Red Sox helmet.

During Jeter’s debut as a member of the crew during the 2023 edition of the MLB London Series , Ortiz pranked him by gifting him a Red Sox jersey with his name and number on it, which Jeter promptly tossed upon realizing what it was.

Following coverage of Game 2 the 2023 American League Championship Series , the analysts discussed if the Houston Astros could rally from their 2–0 series deficit to the Texas Rangers , to which Jeter mentioned his team (which also included Rodriguez) blowing a 3–0 series lead against the Red Sox in the 2004 American League Championship Series , which Ortiz (a member of the Red Sox) responded with “YOU DID?!” (Ortiz notably had two clutch walk-off hits in Games 4 and 5 and was named MVP of the series, and Rodriguez and Jeter were notably involved in a play late in Game 6 where Jeter was on first, and Rodriguez was at bat and hit a ground ball, then slapped it out of the first baseman’s glove in an effort to frame it as a throwing error and allow Jeter to score from first base on the “error” before the umpires conferred with at least one having noticed the slap after the first base umpire did not see it, ruled Rodriguez out for interference, and sent Jeter back to first base, leading to fans throwing debris on the field).

The nature of the rivalry has led to games between the two teams being broadcast on national television. Whenever the two teams play a weekend series, the Friday game is sometimes broadcast on MLB Network (often as part of MLB Network Showcase ) or livestreamed on Apple TV+ ( Friday Night Baseball ), the Saturday game is broadcast on either Fox or Fox Sports 1 ( Fox Saturday Baseball in the afternoon, Baseball Night in America in the evening), and the Sunday game is broadcast on MLB Network in the afternoon or Sunday Night Baseball on either ESPN (1990–2025) or NBC (since 2026); NESN in the Boston market and the YES Network (or Amazon Prime Video in case of conflicts with the Brooklyn Nets and the New York Liberty ) in the New York City market always carry games not assigned on either Fox, FS1 (unless specified), ESPN, ABC or NBC. Weekday games are generally broadcast on MLB Network, FS1 (occasional Monday or Thursday nights ), Fox (Thursday nights during September), ESPN or ABC (mainly special weekday broadcasts), or TBS ( MLB Tuesday as of 2022). On September 22, 2022, a Yankees–Red Sox game was shown exclusively on a livestreaming platform for the first time, with Apple TV+ handling the online-exclusive broadcast as part of Friday Night Baseball .

In 2004, the first game of the season between the two teams, on Friday, April 16, was nationally broadcast on Fox, because it marked the first time the two teams were facing each other since the memorable 2003 American League Championship Series . This was the first over-the-air broadcast of a regular-season game in prime-time since Mark McGwire hit his 62nd home run to break Roger Maris' record in 1998. In October, when the two teams met in the ALCS , Selig moved Game 5 of the series to primetime due to the rematch.

The broadcasts of the games between the rivals have led to an increase in television ratings. These games have had at least 50% higher ratings than all of the other games broadcast, sometimes almost twice as high than locally broadcast games. In most cases, the most-watched MLB game on any network during a season is a game between the Yankees and the Red Sox.

Characters of Shakespear's Plays is an 1817 book of criticism of Shakespeare's plays , written by early nineteenth century English essayist and literary critic William Hazlitt . Composed in reaction to the neoclassical approach to Shakespeare 's plays typified by Samuel Johnson , it was among the first English-language studies of Shakespeare's plays to follow the manner of German critic August Wilhelm Schlegel , and, with the work of Samuel Taylor Coleridge , paved the way for the increased appreciation of Shakespeare's genius that was characteristic of later nineteenth-century criticism. It was also the first book to cover all of Shakespeare's plays, intended as a guide for the general reader.

Then becoming known as a theatre critic, Hazlitt had been focusing increasingly on drama as literature, contributing miscellaneous literary criticism to various journals, including the prestigious Edinburgh Review . This was the first of his book-length literary studies. The plays, the thirty-five that Hazlitt considered to be genuine, are covered in thirty-two chapters, with new material added to passages reworked from periodical articles and reviews. A Preface establishes his main theme of the uniqueness of Shakespeare's characters and looks back at earlier Shakespearean criticism. Two concluding chapters on "Doubtful Plays of Shakespear" and the "Poems and Sonnets" round out the book.

The centre of attention is in large part on the characters, described often with a personal slant and using memorable expressions ("It is we who are Hamlet") and incorporating psychological insights that were to become highly influential in later criticism. Though at first less influential, Hazlitt's comments on the plays' dramatic structure and poetry and on the central themes and general mood of each play laid the groundwork for later critics' more elaborate interpretations. Frequently expressing the view that stage presentation could not do justice to Shakespeare's plays, Hazlitt nevertheless also found certain plays eminently actable, and he frequently admired the performances of certain actors, particularly Edmund Kean .

At first highly acclaimed—it made an immediate and powerful impact on the poet John Keats , among others—then brutally criticised, Hazlitt's book lost much of its influence in the author's lifetime, only to re-enter the mainstream of Shakespearean criticism in the late nineteenth century. The first edition sold out quickly; sales of the second, in mid-1818, were at first brisk, but they ceased entirely in the wake of harshly antagonistic, personally directed, politically motivated reviews in the Tory literary magazines of the day. Although some interest continued to be shown in Hazlitt's work as an essayist, it was not until the end of the nineteenth century, long after Hazlitt's death, that significant interest was again shown in his interpretations of Shakespeare. In the twentieth century, the influential critic A.C. Bradley and a few others began to take seriously the book's interpretations of many of Shakespeare's characters. But then Hazlitt along with Bradley was censured for displaying faults of the "character" school of Shakespearean criticism, primarily that of discussing dramatic characters as though they were real people, and again Hazlitt's contributions to Shakespearean criticism were deprecated.

A revival of interest in Hazlitt, as a thinker, began in the mid-20th century. His thoughts on Shakespeare's plays as a whole (particularly the tragedies), his discussions of certain characters such as Shylock , Falstaff , Imogen , Caliban and Iago and his ideas about the nature of drama and poetry in general, such as expressed in the essay on Coriolanus , gained renewed appreciation and influenced other Shakespearean criticism.

Hazlitt's ideas about many of the plays have now come to be valued as thought-provoking alternatives to those of his contemporary Coleridge, and Characters of Shakespear's Plays is now viewed as a major study of Shakespeare's plays, placing Hazlitt with Schlegel and Coleridge as one of the three most notable Shakespearean critics of the Romantic period .

On 26 January 1814, Edmund Kean debuted as Shylock in Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice at London's Drury Lane theatre. William Hazlitt, drama critic for the Morning Chronicle since the previous September, was in the audience. He wrote a stunning review, followed by several others applauding (but sometimes censuring) Kean's performances in other Shakespearean tragedies, including King Richard II , King Richard III , Hamlet , Macbeth , Romeo and Juliet , and, what Hazlitt considered the best of Kean's performances, Othello . (These were written for the Morning Chronicle , the Champion , and the Examiner ; he was to continue as principal drama critic for the last of these for three years.) Kean was hitherto unknown in London. Hazlitt, having recently begun a career as a theatrical reviewer, was no better known than the subject of his reviews. These notices quickly brought both Kean and Hazlitt before the public eye.

In the course of his preparing for a drama review, Hazlitt was in the habit of reading or rereading the play he was soon to see, and his reviews came to include extensive commentary on the plays themselves, turning rapidly from dramatic criticism to literary criticism. With Shakespeare in particular, this led to considerations of the ways in which the actors—again, particularly his favourite Kean—communicated the message of the plays. But he also noted ways in which no actor's interpretation could live up to the dramatist's conception.

As his musings developed along these lines, Hazlitt continued to contribute miscellaneous articles to various periodicals. In February 1816, he reviewed August Wilhelm Schlegel 's Lectures on Dramatic Literature for the Edinburgh Review . The German critic Schlegel showed an appreciation for Shakespeare of a kind that no one in Hazlitt's country had yet demonstrated, and Hazlitt, sympathising with many of Schlegel's ideas, felt there was a place for a whole book that would provide appreciative criticism of all of Shakespeare's plays. Such a book would provide liberal quotations from the text, and focus on the characters and various qualities particular to each play; and he felt that he could write it. His writing career was now moving in this direction (he had been contributing miscellaneous literary criticism to the Examiner and elsewhere during this period), he needed the money to support his family, and his growing reputation as a drama critic enabled him to have his name appear on the title page (as a reviewer for periodicals, his contributions were anonymous, as was customary at the time).

Thus, Characters of Shakespear's Plays was born. Considerable material that he had already worked up in his drama reviews was incorporated into the book. One essay, on A Midsummer Night's Dream , was taken entire from a contribution to "The Round Table" series in the Examiner , first published on 26 November 1815, with a concluding paragraph tacked on from a drama review, also published in the Examiner , on 21 January 1816. There was material from other essays. Most of "Shakespear's Exact Discrimination of Nearly Similar Characters" (the Examiner , 12 May 1816) made its way into the chapters on King Henry IV , King Henry VI , and Othello . Portions of "Shakespear's Female Characters" (the Examiner , 28 July 1816) found a place in the chapters on Cymbeline and Othello . Hazlitt filled out the rest of what he needed to make a complete book in 1816 and possibly early 1817.

At this time, unhappy with the way his collection The Round Table , issued in the same year, was being promoted by its publisher, he began to promote his new book himself, partly by word of mouth and also by getting a friend to publish the chapter on Hamlet in The Times and requesting Francis Jeffrey , editor of the Edinburgh Review , to notice it in that periodical. He had already had it printed privately (instead of offering it directly to a publisher) by his friend the printer Carew Henry Reynell, who purchased the copyright for £100. As a publicity tactic, copies were circulated privately. Finally, Hazlitt got the book published, by Rowland Hunter and the brothers Charles and James Ollier in collaboration, who brought it out on 9 July 1817. It was extremely successful, this first edition selling out in six weeks. A second edition was issued by Taylor and Hessey in 1818, and later that year an unlicensed edition was brought out in Boston by Wells and Lilly. No further editions appeared in Hazlitt's lifetime.

Characters of Shakespear's Plays consists primarily of Hazlitt's impressions of and thoughts about all of William Shakespeare's plays he believed to be genuine. It was the first book of the kind that anyone had yet written. His main focus is on the characters that appear in the plays, but he also comments on the plays' dramatic structure and poetry, referring frequently to commentary by earlier critics, as well as the manner in which the characters were acted on stage. The essays on the plays themselves (there is a "Preface" as well as an essay on "Doubtful Plays of Shakespear" and one on the "Poems and Sonnets") number thirty-two, but with two of the essays encompassing five of the plays, the plays discussed amount to thirty-five in number. Though each essay constitutes a chapter in a book, in style and length they resemble those of Hazlitt's miscellaneous collection The Round Table (published also in 1817, a collaboration with Leigh Hunt ), which followed the model for periodical essays established a century earlier in The Spectator .

Though Hazlitt could find much to appreciate in the comedies , tragedy was to him inherently more important, and he weights the tragedies much more heavily. In this he differed from Johnson, who thought Shakespeare best at comedy. The greatest of the plays were tragedies—particularly Macbeth , Othello , King Lear , and Hamlet —and Hazlitt's comments on tragedy are often integrated with his ideas about the significance of poetry and imaginative literature in general. As he expressed it at the end of "Lear", tragedy describes the strongest passions, and "the greatest strength of genius is shewn here in describing the strongest passions: for the power of the imagination, in works of invention, must be in proportion to the force of the natural impressions, which are the subject of them."

In the "Preface" Hazlitt establishes his focus on "characters" by quoting Pope 's comment that "every single character in Shakespear, is as much an individual, as those in life itself". After reviewing various other critics of Shakespeare, Hazlitt focuses on two of the most important, including the influential Dr. Johnson. Hazlitt found the Shakespearean criticism of Johnson, the premier literary critic of the previous era, troubling in several ways. He insufficiently valued the tragedies; he missed the essence of much of the poetry; and he "reduced everything to the common standard of conventional propriety [...] the most exquisite refinement or sublimity produced an effect on his mind, only as they could be translated into the language of measured prose". Johnson also believed that every character in Shakespeare represents a "type" or "species", whereas Hazlitt, siding with Pope, emphasised the individuality of Shakespeare's characters, while discussing them more comprehensively than anyone had yet done.

Rather than an English critic, it was the German August Wilhelm Schlegel, whose lectures on the drama had recently been translated into English, whom Hazlitt believed to be the greatest critic of Shakespeare's plays. Hazlitt here includes long extracts from Schlegel on Shakespeare, differing with him principally with respect to what he called a "mysticism" that appears in Schlegel's interpretations. He shared with Schlegel an enthusiasm for Shakespeare that he found lacking in Dr. Johnson. "An overstrained enthusiasm", he remarks, "is more pardonable with respect to Shakespear than the want of it; for our admiration cannot easily surpass his genius."

As one of his favourites, Hazlitt places Cymbeline first in his discussions of Shakespeare's plays, according it extensive treatment. This includes his personal impressions of individual characters—as the book's title would lead us to expect—but also the kind of broader consideration for which he would not be credited for at least a century and a half.

The play's "greatest charm is the character of Imogen ", writes Hazlitt. He observes how, in justifying her actions, "she relies little on her personal charms" or a prudish "affected antipathy to vice" but rather "on her merit, and her merit is in the depth of her love, her truth and constancy." Shakespeare's presentation is full and rounded. We see her beauty as observed by others (as by the villain Iachimo), but more often we see her from the inside, and are touched when, after endless nights of crying herself awake over the loss of Posthumus, she is outraged to learn (as she is falsely informed) that " ' Some Jay of Italy [...] hath betrayed him. ' " And we witness a moment in the development of her character, as her resolve to disguise herself to seek out Posthumus grows firmer. "Of all Shakespear's women she is perhaps the most tender and most artless."

Hazlitt broadens the scope of these reflections into a consideration of "Shakespear's heroines" in general, writing, "No one ever hit the true perfection of the female character, the sense of weakness leaning on the strength of its affections for support, so well as Shakespear". (Here Hazlitt incorporates material from his essay "Shakespear's Female Characters", published in the Examiner on 28 July 1816.)

Hazlitt comments to a lesser degree on other characters, such as Bellarius, Guiderius , and Arviragus ; more often he shows how the characters relate to each other and to the structure of the play. These three, for example, "are a fine relief to the intrigues and artificial refinements of the court from which they are banished."

The character of Cloten, "the conceited, booby lord", is discussed as an occasion for noting how Shakespeare depicted what is most contradictory in human nature. Cloten, "with all the absurdity of his person and manners, is not without shrewdness in his observations." And again Hazlitt steps back and points out how Shakespeare set one character off against the other and presented characters of similar types but with slight modifications of their otherwise similar traits to convey a certain impression about human nature. Hazlitt observes:

[A]s it happens in most of the author's works, there is not only the utmost keeping in each separate character; but in the casting of the different parts, and their relation to one another, there is an affinity and harmony, like what we may observe in the gradations of colour in a picture. The striking and powerful contrasts in which Shakespear abounds could not escape observation; but the use he makes of the principle of analogy to reconcile the greatest diversities of character and to maintain a continuity of feeling throughout, has not been sufficiently attended to.

As he does with character, Hazlitt observes patterns he discovers in the plot. He will have nothing of criticising it in terms of the classical " unities ". The plot must be taken on its own terms. If the action is long-drawn-out, "the interest becomes more aerial and refined from the principle of perspective introduced into the subject by the imaginary changes of scene, as well as by the length of time it occupies."

Regarding Shakespeare's weaving together of the story's threads, Hazlitt marvels at the "ease and conscious unconcern" with which "[t]he most straggling and seemingly casual incidents are contrived [and] in such a manner as to lead at last to the most complete developement of the catastrophe." Again, he broadens the discussion and argues against the view of Dr. Johnson "that Shakespear was generally inattentive to the winding-up of his plots. We think the contrary is true; and we might cite in proof of this remark not only the present play, but the conclusion of Lear , of Romeo and Juliet , of Macbeth , of Othello , even of Hamlet , and of other plays of less moment, in which the last act is crowded with decisive events brought about by natural means."

Beyond plot, beyond individual characters, Hazlitt rounds out his discussion by noting the prevailing mood, the "tender gloom [that] overspreads the whole" play. He sees the parallel yet subtly contrasting lines of the story playing against each other "unconsciously" in the mind of the reader as of the author, working by "the force of natural association, a particular train of thought suggesting different inflections of the same predominant feeling, melting into, and strengthening one another, like chords in music." Thus, far more than simply commenting on particular characters, Hazlitt elucidates the character of the play as a whole.

Hazlitt's focus in the essay on Coriolanus is less on the various characters of Shakespeare's tragedy than on the fundamental moral and political principles behind their actions. For Hazlitt, this play showed in action the concepts behind political writings of his own day, such as Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France and Thomas Paine 's Rights of Man . The character of Coriolanus is a type of the aristocratic hero, though presented as a well-rounded individual, with a "pride" consisting of "inflexible sternness of will", a "love of reputation" and "glory", and a "contempt of popular opinion". Hazlitt also comments on the characters of Coriolanus's mother and wife, and he points out the substantial fidelity of this play to its source in Thomas North's translation of Plutarch 's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans , extracting long passages from the life of Coriolanus.

His primary focus, however, is on Shakespeare's dramatisation of "the arguments for and against aristocracy or democracy, on the privileges of the few and the claims of many". Shakespeare shows the weaknesses of both the nobles and the people, but, thought Hazlitt, he was biased somewhat in favour of the nobility, leading him to gloss over their defects more so than those of the common people.

But Hazlitt goes further, to develop an idea that only much later was seen to have radical implications for literary theory : he claims that it is of the very nature of poetry to glorify the aristocrat, the solitary hero, and the monarch, while being much less suited to represent, in ways that capture the imagination, the social problems of the common people. Poetic "imagination naturally falls in with the language of power. The imagination is an exaggerating and exclusive faculty: it takes from one thing to add to another: it accumulates circumstances together to give the greatest possible effect to a favourite object." On the other hand, the language that would be used to argue the cause of the people relies more on "the understanding", which "is a dividing and measuring faculty: it judges of things not according to their immediate impression on the mind, but according to their relations to one another. [...] Poetry [on the other hand] is right-royal. It puts the individual for the species, the one above the infinite many, might before right."

"So we feel some concern for the poor citizens of Rome when they meet together to compare their wants and grievances, till Coriolanus comes in and with blows and big words drives this set of 'poor rats,' this rascal scum, to their homes and beggary before him. There is nothing heroical in a multitude of miserable rogues not wishing to be starved [...] but when a single man comes forward to brave their cries and to make them submit to the last indignities, from mere pride and self-will, our admiration of his prowess is immediately converted into contempt for their pusillanimity." The key for Hazlitt is the innate human "love of power". This love of power is not necessarily expressed by a will to dominate others physically; but there is at least the tendency to side with power in the imagination, to be swayed and carried away emotionally by the power of poetic language. Hazlitt's own worship of Napoleon, it was later observed, could be taken as an example of this tendency.

Hazlitt for the most part agreed with his contemporary Romantics that poetry can make us better human beings. The following year, in his Lectures on the English Poets , referring to tragic poetry especially, he would observe how "in proportion as it sharpens the edge of calamity and disappointment, it strengthens the desire of good." Yet, he remained alert to ways in which poetry can also express and reinforce our less admirable tendencies. Following an observation of Burke he notes that "people flock to see a tragedy; but if there were a public execution in the next street, the theatre would very soon be empty. [...] We are [...] fond of indulging our violent passions [....] We cannot help it. The sense of power is as strong a principle in the mind as the love of pleasure."

Alarmingly, this tendency, as shown in Coriolanus , could seem to so glorify tyranny and oppression as to lead people to accept it in practice:

The whole dramatic moral of Coriolanus is that those who have little shall have less, and that those who have much shall take all that others have left. The people are poor; therefore they ought to be starved. They are slaves; therefore they ought to be beaten. They work hard; therefore they ought to be treated like beasts of burden. They are ignorant; therefore they ought not to be allowed to feel that they want food, or clothing, or rest, that they are enslaved, oppressed, and miserable. This is the logic of the imagination and the passions; which seek to aggrandise what excites admiration and to heap contempt on misery, to raise power into tyranny, and to make tyranny absolute; to thrust down that which is low still lower, and to make wretches desperate: to exalt magistrates into kings, kings into gods; to degrade subjects to the rank of slaves, and slaves to the condition of brutes. The history of mankind is a romance, a mask, a tragedy, constructed upon the principles of poetical justice; it is a noble or royal hunt, in which what is sport to the few is death to the many, and in which the spectators halloo and encourage the strong to set upon the weak, and cry havoc in the chase though they do not share in the spoil. We may depend upon it that what men delight to read in books, they will put in practice in reality.

In this way Hazlitt demonstrated how poetry might be used to glorify tyranny and oppression, a tendency he saw disturbingly prominent in Coriolanus . A lifelong advocate of individual freedom and the cause of the people as against the oppression of aristocracy, the tyranny of " legitimate " monarchy, Hazlitt was disturbed by this tendency in the human imagination as expressed in poetry, and it was here that these misgivings first entered into his general theory of poetry. These thoughts were not particularly noticed for a century and a half, when critic John Kinnaird pointed out how curiously at odds with the more typical critical theories of poetry Hazlitt's idea was, setting him apart from contemporaries such as Wordsworth and Coleridge: "Students of Hazlitt's thought have strangely neglected this passage, yet the idea it introduces is perhaps the most original, and surely the most heretical, idea in the entire range of his criticism." Kinnaird notes that Lionel Trilling was the first critic to grasp the "originality and importance of this passage", though even Trilling interpreted Hazlitt's idea of the human love of power in too narrow a sense.

Having observed the workings of what he thought an alarming tendency of the poetic imagination, as well as Shakespeare's possible aristocratic bias, Hazlitt then observes that, after all, traits of Coriolanus's character emerge, even in this dramatic context, that Shakespeare clearly shows to be less than admirable. For example, "Coriolanus complains of the fickleness of the people: yet, the instant he cannot gratify his pride and obstinacy at their expense, he turns his arms against his own country. If his country was not worth defending, why did he build his pride in its defence?"

Ultimately, Hazlitt tried to form a balanced judgement of the play. Comparing Hazlitt's account with that of a famous contemporary, David Bromwich thought that nothing like this critical stance can "be found anywhere in the whole range of Coleridge's criticism."

The character of Sir John Falstaff appeared in three of Shakespeare's plays, Henry IV, Part 1 , Henry IV, Part 2 , and The Merry Wives of Windsor . The bulk of Hazlitt's commentary on the two history plays is devoted to Falstaff, whom he considers to be "perhaps the most substantial comic character ever invented".

Falstaff had been of interest to Shakespearean commentators for years. Forty years earlier, a full-length book had appeared, An Essay on the Dramatic Character of Sir John Falstaff (1777), by Maurice Morgann , often taken as the beginning of that school of Shakespearean criticism which considers the characters of Shakespeare's plays as though they were real people. Hazlitt, who seems to have had little acquaintance with Morgann's work, is careful never to lose sight of Falstaff's status as a character in a play —three plays, in fact, though the two parts of Henry IV are examined in a single essay.

In conveying his impressions of Falstaff, Hazlitt first emphasises the sheer physical bulk that we remember him by: "We are as well acquainted with his person as his mind, and his jokes come upon us with double force and relish from the quantity of flesh through which they make their way, as he shakes his fat sides with laughter [...].

Then Hazlitt observes the connection between Falstaff's body and his "wit": "Falstaff's wit is an emanation of a fine constitution; an exuberance of good-humour and good-nature; an overflowing of his love of laughter and good fellowship; a giving vent to his heart's ease, and over-contentment with himself and others."

Answering those who consider Falstaff a "mere sensualist", he points out how little we actually see Falstaff indulging himself. "All this is as much in imagination as in reality. His sensuality does not engross and stupify his other faculties [...]. His imagination keeps up the ball after his senses have done with it. He seems to have even a greater enjoyment of the freedom from restraint, of good cheer, of his ease, of his vanity, in the ideal exaggerated description he gives of them, than in fact."

This leads Hazlitt to consider why, when Falstaff "is represented as a liar, a braggart, a coward, a glutton, etc., [...] we are not offended but delighted with him [...]." The answer is that "he is all these as much to amuse others as to gratify himself. He openly assumes all these characters to shew the humourous part of them. The unrestrained indulgence of his own ease, appetites, and convenience, has neither malice nor hypocrisy in it. In a word, he is an actor in himself almost as much as upon the stage, and we no more object to the character of Falstaff in a moral point of view than we should think of bringing an excellent comedian, who should represent him to the life, before one of the police offices."

Hazlitt goes on to present extracts of his favourite scenes, including those between Falstaff and Prince Hal, and Falstaff and Mistress Quickly. This is merged into a consideration of the way Falstaff interacts with some other characters, and the way Shakespeare's characters reflect on one another, each in his or her behaviour shedding light on key traits in the others.

This in turn leads to commentary on the "heroic and serious parts of" Henry IV , parts 1 and 2, and, finally, to more general reflections on Shakespeare's genius. But the character of Falstaff has had the lion's share of the discussion, and Hazlitt ends his essay on the two history plays by balancing his personal feelings about Falstaff with a more distanced, objective comment on the dramas as history plays in a broader context:

"The truth is, that we never could forgive the Prince's treatment of Falstaff [...]" by banishing him after the Prince has become King Henry V, "though perhaps Shakespear knew what was best, according to the history, the nature of the times, and of the man."

Hazlitt's enthusiastic explanation of how Falstaff's fatness contributes to our amused sympathy with him was later especially admired by the critic John Dover Wilson . And John Kinnaird considered the "sketch of Falstaff" in this essay to be a "masterpiece", "a brilliant [...] portrait of comic exuberance incarnate", though perhaps in part a creation of his own imagination rather than being entirely faithful to the character as created by Shakespeare. More recently the critic Harold Bloom , in a book devoted entirely to Falstaff, approvingly noted Hazlitt's appreciative commentary on the character, quoting Hazlitt's observation that Falstaff "lives in a perpetual holiday and open house, and we live with him in a round of invitations to a rump and dozen."

Falstaff's appearance in The Merry Wives of Windsor is far less significant; although he found things to admire in this play, to Hazlitt, "Falstaff in the Merry Wives of Windsor is not the man he was in the two parts of Henry IV ."

Though at times Hazlitt delighted in actors' interpretations of Shakespearean characters, and he thought some of Shakespeare's plays eminently suited for the stage, he opens the chapter on Hamlet by proclaiming, "We do not like to see our author's plays acted, and least of all, Hamlet". Here, more than anywhere else, he sides with Charles Lamb in believing Shakespeare's plays to suffer in stage presentation. Neither John Kemble nor his favourite actor Edmund Kean played the role of Hamlet to his satisfaction. "Mr. Kean's Hamlet is as much too splenetic and rash as Mr. Kemble's is too deliberate and formal." This, he felt, is a play to be read, and he noted that by his time it had already been so often read as to have become part of the common culture. "This is that Hamlet the Dane, whom we read of in our youth". One might say, he observes, that Hamlet is just a character in a play: "Hamlet is a name; his speeches and sayings but the idle coinage of the poet's brain." Yet Shakespeare gives those sayings a reality in the mind of the reader, making them "as real as our own thoughts."

Of all Shakespeare's plays, this one is "the most remarkable for the ingenuity, originality, and unstudied developement of character", writes Hazlitt. He thought of Hamlet more often than any of Shakespeare's other plays because "it abounds most in striking reflections on human life, and because the distresses of Hamlet are transferred, by the turn of his mind, to the general account of humanity."

"The character of Hamlet [...] is not a character marked by strength of will or even of passion, but by refinement of thought and sentiment", writes Hazlitt, and he sides with Schlegel and Coleridge in thinking that Hamlet "seems incapable of deliberate action". "His ruling passion is to think, not to act".

Although the focus in this essay is largely on the character of Prince Hamlet, Hazlitt also comments on the movement of the dramatic action. Shakespeare lends all the characters and settings an air of verisimilitude, so that the reader might consider "the whole play [to be] an exact transcription of what might be supposed to have taken place at the court of Denmark, at the remote period of time fixed upon, before the modern refinements in morals and manners were heard of. [...] the characters think and speak and act just as they might do, if left entirely to themselves. There is no set purpose, no straining at a point."

Hazlitt also reflects on Shakespeare's thorough understanding of the complexity of human character. Queen Gertrude, "who was so criminal in some respects [was] not without sensibility and affection in other relations of life." Again, he comments on the idea expressed by other critics that some characters are too inconsistent in their behaviour to be plausible, particularly Polonius . If "his advice to [his son] Laertes is very excellent, and his advice to the King and Queen on the subject of Hamlet's madness very ridiculous", that is "because [Shakespeare] kept up the distinction which there is in nature, between the understandings and the moral habits of men. [...] Polonius is not a fool, but he makes himself so."

Hazlitt's essay on Hamlet was later used by David Bromwich in an extensive comparison of Coleridge's and Hazlitt's critical views in general. Although, to Bromwich, Coleridge's criticism of Hamlet contained a greater number of original ideas, including the general assessment of Prince Hamlet's character, Hazlitt's view is notable in that it does not, like Coleridge, reduce that character to a single dominating flaw, his inability to act. In one of his lectures on Shakespeare, Coleridge claimed that "Shakespeare wished to impress upon us the truth that action is the chief end of existence—that no faculties of intellect, however brilliant, can be considered valuable, or indeed otherwise than as misfortunes, if they withdraw us from or render us repugnant to action, and lead us to think and think of doing, until the time has elapsed when we can do anything effectually." Hazlitt, on the other hand, instead of applying this moral, pointed to the necessity of each reader's identifying with Hamlet to understand him (which, he believed, occurred more readily than with any other of Shakespeare's characters) and the reader's judging of Hamlet in part on the basis of what that reader then saw in himself. This made it unlikely that Hamlet's entire character would be reduced to a single flaw that would provide the reader with a moral lesson.

Shakespeare did not force Prince Hamlet to conform to any particular rules of morality. "The moral perfection of this character has been called in question", Hazlitt writes, but "the ethical delineations of [Shakespeare] do not exhibit the drab-coloured quakerism of morality." Hazlitt understood that human character is too complicated for such a portrayal to conform to the truth of human nature. "On the morality of literature", observes Bromwich, "Coleridge will usually be found a resolute guide, and Hazlitt an unsettling observer."

John Kinnaird also paid particular attention to Hazlitt's "celebrated" sketch of Prince Hamlet in this essay. Although Hazlitt does not entirely belong to the school of pure "character" critics, this essay does tend to be more of a "character" criticism than others, asserts Kinnaird, because Hazlitt shared with his Romantic contemporaries an "ambivalence toward tragedy". Hamlet to him as to his contemporaries was a modern character who was "obsessed with evil in the world[,] [...] long[ed] to escape from knowledge of it in themselves [and had a] pessimistic sense that suffering changes nothing and that the world must go on as it is." Thus, Hazlitt could declare, "It is we who are Hamlet."

Hazlitt incorporated into this chapter material from his review of Kean's performance of Hamlet at Drury Lane on 12 March 1814 ("Mr. Kean's Hamlet", The Morning Chronicle , 14 March 1814). That review already included Hazlitt's musings on the difficulty of presenting Hamlet on stage, after seeing how even his favourite Kean failed to interpret Hamlet's character adequately. The celebrated passages that begin with "This is that Hamlet the Dane" and include the assertion "It is we who are Hamlet" appear, however, only in the final form of the essay in Characters of Shakespear's Plays .

In the essay on King Lear , which he entitled simply "Lear", Hazlitt makes no references to the performances of any actors. In fact, here he fully agrees with Lamb that King Lear , like Hamlet , cannot be adequately presented on stage. No actors, he felt, could do justice to the overwhelming imaginative power of this play.

Hazlitt was so deeply affected by this tragedy that he begins the chapter with a regret that he had to write about it at all. "To attempt to give a description of the play itself or its effect upon the mind, is mere impertinence". Yet what he did write turned out to be a major piece of literary criticism that contributed to his general concepts about tragedy and poetry, and made a powerful impression on the poet John Keats.

"The greatest strength of genius", Hazlitt writes, "is shewn in describing the strongest passions". This play takes as its subject the strongest passions, and Shakespeare's genius rose to the occasion. Here, Shakespeare was more "in earnest" than in any of his other creations, and "he was fairly caught in the web of his own imagination". The result was his best tragedy, and therefore his best play.

Of King Lear in general, Hazlitt writes:

The passion which he has taken as his subject is that which strikes its root deepest into the human heart [...] This depth of nature, this force of passion, this tug and war of the elements of our being, this firm faith in filial piety, and the giddy anarchy and whirling tumult of the thoughts at finding this prop failing it, the contrast between the fixed, immovable basis of natural affection, and the rapid, irregular starts of imagination, suddenly wrenched from all its accustomed holds and resting-places in the soul, this is what Shakespear has given, and what nobody else but he could give.

Some space is devoted to the psychological scrutiny of the principal characters, but with consideration, also, of their function in the dramatic construct. "The character of Lear" is perfectly conceived for its place in the play, "the only ground on which such a story could be built with the greatest truth and effect. It is his rash haste, his violent impetuosity, his blindness to every thing but the dictates of his passions or affection, that produces all his misfortunes, that aggravates his impatience of them, that enforces our pity for him."

Hazlitt then comments on some of the other characters seen not in isolation but as they interact with and affect one another, comparing and contrasting them to highlight subtle differences. For example, the characters of Goneril and Regan, the comparison of which he begins with a note of personal distaste ("they are so thoroughly hateful that we do not even like to repeat their names"), are shown, he points out, partly in their reaction to their sister Cordelia's desire that they treat their father well— " ' Prescribe not to us our duties ' " —and partly by the contrast of their hypocrisy with the candour of the otherwise evil Edmund .

Hazlitt lingers briefly on the character of Lear's third daughter, Cordelia, observing, in one of his psychological asides, that "the indiscreet simplicity of her love [...] has a little of her father's obstinacy in it".

Going beyond specific characters, or even specific interactions among them, Hazlitt delineates what he calls the "logic of passion", the rhythm of emotions in the drama, and its effect on the mind of the reader or viewer. "We see the ebb and flow of the feeling, its pauses and feverish starts, its impatience of opposition, its accumulating force when it has had time to recollect itself, the manner in which it avails itself of every passing word or gesture, its haste to repel insinuation, the alternate contraction and dilatation of the soul, and all 'the dazzling fence of controversy' in this mortal combat with poisoned weapons, aimed at the heart, where each wound is fatal." He observes, too, in explaining an instance of what later came to be called comic relief, how when the reader's feelings are strained to the utmost, "just as [...] the fibres of the heart [...] are growing rigid from over-strained excitement [...] [t]he imagination is glad to take refuge in the half-comic, half-serious comments of the Fool, just as the mind under the extreme anguish of a surgical operation vents itself in sallies of wit."

And again, on Shakespeare's artistry, Hazlitt remarks on the way the second plot, involving Gloucester, Edgar, and Edmund, is interwoven with the main plot: "Indeed, the manner in which the threads of the story are woven together is almost as wonderful in the way of art as the carrying on the tide of passion, still varying and unimpaired, is on the score of nature."

Hazlitt appreciatively quotes long extracts from what he considered some of the best scenes, and remarks that, as sad as the concluding events are, "The oppression of the feelings is relieved by the very interest we take in the misfortunes of others, and by the reflections to which they give birth." This leads to his mentioning the then-current practice of substituting, on stage, a happy ending for Shakespeare's tragic one, which had been approved by no less an authority than Dr. Johnson. Arguing against this practice, Hazlitt brings in a lengthy quote from an article Lamb wrote for Leigh Hunt's Reflector , which concludes: "A happy ending!—as if the living martyrdom that Lear had gone through,—the flaying of his feelings alive, did not make a fair dismissal from life the only decorous thing for him."

Hazlitt, however, in the view of John Kinnaird, goes beyond Lamb in maintaining that it is Lear's very despair, by which "all the powers of thought and feeling" were elicited and intensified, that gives him tragic "strength and grandeur".

By early 1818, a few months after the publication of Characters of Shakespear's Plays , John Keats had acquired a copy. Fascinated by what he read, particularly by the essay on King Lear , he underlined passages and added comments in the margins. Keats especially liked what Hazlitt wrote on the play's "ebb and flow of the feeling" and noted, using a term he had heard Hazlitt himself apply to Shakespeare in his 27 January lecture "On Shakspeare and Milton", "This passage has to a great degree hieroglyphic visioning." Together with what he had already read of Hazlitt's work, especially the essay "On Gusto" from The Round Table , which had helped him develop his celebrated idea about "Negative Capability", this essay on King Lear inspired much of his own poetry and thoughts about poetry.

Hazlitt ends the chapter by making four points about genius, poetry, and especially tragedy. To David Bromwich the most important of these is the third, "That the greatest strength of genius is shewn in describing the strongest passions: for the power of the imagination, in works of invention, must be in proportion to the force of the natural impressions, which are the subject of them."

Bromwich noted that Hazlitt's thoughts, particularly as applied to Lear , are here in line with those of Shelley in his Defence of Poetry . Bromwich also noted that for Hazlitt the power of this play is achieved by Shakespeare's unwillingness to soften the harshness of "nature", as expressed in Lear's halting, broken outcries, such as "I will have such revenges on you both, [Goneril and Regan]/That all the world shall——". This approach is never quite followed by even so great a contemporary poet as Wordsworth. To Hazlitt, this is a demonstration of why the greatest poetry of his own age failed to achieve the level of greatness that Shakespeare reached here. That King Lear is strongest in subordinating the artistry of dramatic poetry to the power of nature is also why its kind of poetry is superior to the more artificial kind produced by Pope.

Among Shakespeare's four principal tragedies, Macbeth , according to Hazlitt in this chapter, is notable for its wild extremes of action, its preponderance of violence, and its representation of "imagination" strained to the verge of the forbidden and the darker mysteries of existence. "This tragedy is alike distinguished for the lofty imagination it displays, and for the tumultuous vehemence of the action; and the one is made the moving principle of the other", Hazlitt writes. Macbeth "moves upon the verge of an abyss, and is a constant struggle between life and death. The action is desperate and the reaction is dreadful. [...] The whole play is an unruly chaos of strange and forbidden things, where the ground rocks under our feet."

Here again, Hazlitt is interested not merely in individual characters but in the character of the play as a whole, focusing especially on the supernatural underpinnings, with the prophecies of the three witches on the "blasted heath", with which Macbeth struggles, wrestling with his destiny, through to the play's tragic climax. Hazlitt is especially interested in the "design" of Macbeth , in its general mood, its "full poetic 'impression ' " , and in this, according to John Kinnaird, he anticipates the method of the twentieth-century Shakespearean critic G. Wilson Knight. "Shakespear", writes Hazlitt, "lost sight of nothing that could in any way give relief or heightening to his subject [...]."

Further noting Shakespeare's crafting of the play, Hazlitt points to fine touches at the beginning that contribute to a unified effect: "The wildness of the scenery, the sudden shifting of the situations and characters, the bustle, the expectations excited, [all] are equally extraordinary." "Shakespear", he writes, "excelled in the openings of his plays: that of Macbeth is the most striking of any."

He also, as in his essay on Hamlet , notes the realistic effect of Macbeth : "His plays have the force of things upon the mind. What he represents is brought home to the bosom as a part of our experience, implanted in the memory as if we had known the places, persons, and things of which he treats."

In considering the characters, Hazlitt emphasises the importance of their interaction, the way in which a major character's behaviour helps define that of another. This is especially true of Macbeth and Lady Macbeth, locked together in a struggle against all Scotland and their fate. Macbeth, as he is about to commit his bloodiest deeds, is "assailed by the stings of remorse, and full of 'preternatural solicitings.' [...] In thought he is absent and perplexed, sudden and desperate in act, from his own irresolution." This is in contrast with, and "set off by" the character of "Lady Macbeth, whose obdurate strength of will and masculine firmness give her the ascendancy over her husband's faultering virtue. [...] The magnitude of her resolution almost covers the magnitude of her guilt." But in effect Macbeth and Lady Macbeth exchange places as the action develops. He "becomes more callous as he plunges deeper in guilt [...] and [...] in the end anticipates his wife in the boldness and bloodiness of his enterprises, while she for want of the same stimulus of action, [...] goes mad and dies."

Here as elsewhere, Hazlitt illuminates the characters not only by contrast with others in the same play but with characters in other plays. A lengthy passage, adapted from an 1814 drama review by Hazlitt, compares Macbeth and King Richard III from Shakespeare's play of that name. Both characters "are tyrants, usurpers, murderers, both aspiring and ambitious, both courageous, cruel, treacherous." But Richard is "naturally incapable of good" and "wades through a series of crimes [...] from the ungovernable violence of his temper and a reckless love of mischief", while Macbeth, "full of 'the milk of human kindness ' " , "is with difficulty prevailed upon to commit [...] the murder of Duncan " and is filled "with remorse after its perpetration."

Similarly, though Lady Macbeth is evil, "[s]he is only wicked to gain a great end" and it is only her "inexorable self-will" that prevents her being diverted from her "bad purpose" which masks her "natural affections"; whereas Goneril and Regan, in King Lear , "excite our loathing and abhorrence" as Lady Macbeth does not. Further, Hazlitt notes that Lady Macbeth displays human emotions, "swelling exultation and keen spirit of triumph, [...] uncontroulable eagerness of anticipation [...] solid, substantial flesh and blood display of passion"; while the witches from the same play are only "hags of mischief", "unreal, abortive, half-existences".

Because of their human qualities, we never entirely lose sympathy with Macbeth and Lady Macbeth, and our imagination participates with theirs in the tragedy. Their imagination makes the two more human and yet also destroys them. As Kinnaird points out (elaborating on an idea of Joseph W. Donohue Jr.), Hazlitt in part sees Macbeth as a tragedy of imagination itself.

One concern addressed by Hazlitt is the assertion by previous critics that Macbeth is little more than a crude and violent amalgam of extremes filled with "Gothic" barbarisms. Hazlitt notes, however, that should anyone think Macbeth's character is so composed of contradictory extremes as to be implausible, it is, rather, the circumstances and the passions in conflict that provide the extremes, while Macbeth's character retains a strong underlying unity throughout. "Macbeth in Shakespear no more loses his identity of character in the fluctuations of fortune or the storm of passions than Macbeth in himself would have lost the identity of his person." Kinnaird notes that here, as if anticipating it by a century, Hazlitt argues against the view advanced by Elmer Edgar Stoll in 1933, that Macbeth's character is too full of contradictions to be plausible.

Although he lingers nostalgically on his memory of the great actress Sarah Siddons 's performance as Lady Macbeth, and a few years earlier had acknowledged that Kean and John Kemble had been at least partly successful in the role of Macbeth (though each in different portions of it), on the whole he expressed doubts about the success of the staging of this play, again agreeing with Lamb.  By the time he composed this chapter of Characters , he could write, "We can conceive [...] no one to play Macbeth properly, or to look like a man that had encountered the Weïrd Sisters." Further observations follow about the witches themselves. Part of the problem was that by his day, there remained few who really believed in the supernatural, and "by the force of the police and of philosophy [...] the ghosts in Shakespear will become obsolete." He concludes by quoting at length a passage from an essay by Lamb on the originality of Shakespeare's portrayal of the witches.

Hazlitt's treatment of The Merchant of Venice centres on the character of Shylock. A few years earlier, Edmund Kean had appeared as the Jewish moneylender in his debut performance at Drury Lane . Hazlitt, the drama critic for the Morning Chronicle in January 1814, sat close to the stage and watched every facial expression, every movement. He was astounded at Kean's, for the time, radically unconventional portrayal of Shylock as a full, rounded, complex human being, full of vigour, rather than a doddering, malevolent stereotype. His positive review of Kean's performance became critical in boosting the actor's career. But Kean's performance also helped alter Hazlitt's own view of Shylock, which made its way into this essay a few years later. Hazlitt admitted that he had tended to accept the older interpretation of Shylock's character as it had been depicted on stage, which followed centuries-old prejudices against the Jews, and made him a one-dimensional character. Kean's performance led him to study the play closely and think deeply about Shylock. Though Shylock's "mind is warped with prejudices and passion [...] that he has but one idea, is not true; he has more ideas than any other person in the piece; and if he is intense and inveterate in the pursuit of his purpose, he shews the utmost elasticity, vigour, and presence of mind, in the means of attaining it".

Although old prejudices against the Jews were starting to disappear, as Hazlitt notes (he refers to the portrayal of "the benevolent Jew" in Richard Cumberland 's play The Jew of 1794), and some reviewers had begun to discover something respectable in Shylock's figure, a century and a half later critic David Bromwich would suggest that, in retrospect, it was Hazlitt himself, even more than Kean, who paved the way for what became the prevalent reading of Shylock's character. Though Shylock is serious about revenge, he is true to himself in other ways that cast a less than favourable light on other characters in the play. After Hazlitt's account, according to Bromwich, it became less easy to find a simple resolution to the problems in the play or to withhold entirely our sympathy for Shylock, particularly in view of a passage like the following:

Shylock is a good hater ; "a man no less sinned against than sinning." If he carries his revenge too far, yet he has strong grounds for "the lodged hate he bears Anthonio", which he explains with equal force of eloquence and reason. He seems the depositary of the vengeance of his race; and though the long habit of brooding over daily insults and injuries has crusted over his temper with inveterate misanthropy, and hardened him against the contempt of mankind, this adds but little to the triumphant pretensions of his enemies. There is a strong, quick, and deep sense of justice mixed up with the gall and bitterness of his resentment. [...] The desire of revenge is almost inseparable from the sense of wrong; and we can hardly help sympathising with the proud spirit, hid beneath his "Jewish gaberdine", stung to madness by repeated undeserved provocations, and labouring to throw off the load of obloquy and oppression heaped upon him and all his tribe by one desperate act of "lawful" revenge, till the ferociousness of the means by which he is to execute his purpose, and the pertinacity with which he adheres to it, turn us against him; but even at last, when disappointed of the sanguinary revenge with which he had glutted his hopes, and exposed to beggary and contempt by the letter of the law on which he had insisted with so little remorse, we pity him, and think him hardly dealt with by his judges.

Other critics even in later years insisted that the character of Shylock is that of an outsider separated from society, that the Jewish Shylock represented an older form of justice, meant to be supplanted by the Christian view, represented by Portia , who argued for the prevalence of mercy. Shylock, these critics maintained, must be removed in order to allow society to attain a Christian form of peace. Hazlitt's view, however, has remained as a valid countervailing concept of the play, one that does not arrive at easy conclusions or take sides readily.

Hazlitt also reflects on several other characters. Portia, for example, was no favourite of his, and "has a certain degree of affectation and pedantry about her". Gratiano he finds "a very admirable subordinate character".

Once again, as John Kinnaird observed, Hazlitt is here far more than a "character critic", showing serious interest in the structure of the play as a whole. "The whole of the trial-scene", he remarks in this essay, "is a master-piece of dramatic skill. The legal acuteness, the passionate declamations, the sound maxims of jurisprudence, the wit and irony interspersed in it, the fluctuations of hope and fear in the different persons, and the completeness and suddenness of the catastrophe, cannot be surpassed". He points to some beautiful poetic passages, and concludes that "the graceful winding up of this play [...] is one of the happiest instances of Shakespear's knowledge of the principles of the drama".

While Hazlitt's discussion of Othello includes observations about the characters, his consideration of this play, as with all of the four major tragedies, is combined with ideas about the purpose and value of tragedy and even of poetry in general. Expanding upon Aristotle 's idea in the Poetics that "tragedy purifies the affections by terror and pity," he asserts that tragedy "makes us thoughtful spectators in the lists of life. It is the refiner of the species; a discipline of humanity."

Furthermore, Othello , more than the other tragedies, has for the average viewer or reader a "close[...] application" to the experiences of everyday life. Hazlitt brings out this point by comparing Othello to Macbeth , where "there is a violent struggle between opposite feelings, between ambition and the stings of conscience, almost from first to last: in Othello , the doubtful conflict between contrary passions, though dreadful, continues only for a short time, and the chief interest is excited by the alternate ascendancy of different passions, by the entire and unforeseen change from the fondest love and most unbounded confidence to the tortures of jealousy and the madness of hatred."

Hazlitt's discussion of the particular characters incorporates observations about the way Shakespeare creates them, showing that, rather than being broad types, characters even superficially similar differ in finely discriminated ways. Desdemona and Emilia , for example, are "to outward appearance, characters of common life, not more distinguished than women generally are, by difference of rank and situation." As the dialogue unfolds, "the difference of their thoughts and sentiments is however laid open, their minds are separated from each other by signs as plain and as little to be mistaken as the complexions of their husbands."

With all his frequently noted attention to character and characters —Hazlitt's partly psychological approach to character necessarily referred to observed real-life behavior—he also frequently emphasises the art by which Shakespeare created dramatic "character". Particularly in tragedy, a "sense of power", he believed, is the essential medium by which a poet of genius operates on the minds of his audience. When the author instills in the reader or viewer's imagination the sense of power that he must have had in grasping and conveying intertwined passions, he makes us identify with a character such as Othello, and feel in ourselves the way Iago plays upon his mind so that, ironically, his weakness is made to undermine his strength.

Hazlitt often focuses, as well, on specific traits by comparing the characters not to those of real life but to characters in Shakespeare's other plays, comparing, for example, Iago with Edmund in King Lear . His interest in the art of drama emerges even more obviously when he compares Iago with the villainous character Zanga in Edward Young 's The Revenge (1721), still a popular play in Hazlitt's day.

For Hazlitt, Othello is especially notable for the interplay between the characters, and the way Shakespeare communicates the slow and gradual "movement of passion [...] the alternate ascendancy of different passions, [...] the entire and unforeseen change from the fondest love and most unbounded confidence to the tortures of jealousy and the madness of hatred." He finds especially remarkable the gradual alteration of Othello's feelings about Desdemona as his mind is played upon by Iago. Othello is not naturally a violent person in everyday life: "The nature of the Moor is noble, confiding, tender and generous; but his blood is of the most inflammable kind; and being once roused by a sense of his wrongs, he is stopped by no considerations of remorse or pity till he has given a loose to all the dictates of his rage and despair. [...] The third act of Othello is [Shakespeare's] finest display, not of knowledge and passion separately, but of the two combined." Hazlitt continues:

It is in working [Othello's] noble nature up to this extremity through rapid but gradual transitions, in raising passion to its height from the smallest beginnings and in spite of all obstacles, in painting the expiring conflict between love and hatred, tenderness and resentment, jealousy and remorse, in unfolding the strength and the weakness of our nature, in uniting sublimity of thought with the anguish of the keenest woe, in putting in motion the various impulses that agitate this our mortal being, and at last blending them in that noble tide of deep and sustained passion, impetuous but majestic [...] that Shakespear has shewn the mastery of his genius and of his power over the human heart.

Desdemona's character is shown in her attachment to her husband. "Her beauty and external graces are only indirectly glanced at." Her attachment to Othello begins in a manner "a little fantastical and headstrong." But after that her "whole character consists in having no will of her own, no prompter but her obedience." Even "the extravagance of her resolutions, the pertinacity of her affections, may be said to arise out of the gentleness of her nature."

Three years earlier, in the review "Mr. Kean's Iago" in The Examiner (7 August 1814), Hazlitt had ventured to speculate that Iago's suggestions of lasciviousness in Desdemona may have had some basis in truth, as "purity and grossness sometimes 'nearly are allied,/And thin partitions do their bounds divide. ' " Although he omitted this thought from Characters of Shakespear's Plays , that did not stop an anonymous reviewer in Blackwood's Magazine from accusing him of calling Desdemona a "lewd" character. In "A Reply to 'Z ' " , written in 1818 but never published, Hazlitt answers his accuser: "It is not true that I have insinuated that Desdemona was a lewd woman, any more than Shakespear has insinuated it, but I have dared to say that he alone could have given additional elegance and even delicacy to a female character from the very disadvantageous circumstances in which Desdemona is placed."

Hazlitt's treatment of the character of Iago is written in part as a response to those who "thought this whole character unnatural, because his villainy is without a sufficient motive. " Hazlitt responds with a psychological analysis that exerted great influence and sparked considerable discussion: Shakespeare "knew that the love of power, which is another name for the love of mischief, is natural to man. [...] He would know this [...] merely from seeing children paddle in the dirt or kill flies for sport. Iago in fact belongs to a class of character, common to Shakespear and at the same time peculiar to him; whose heads are as acute and active as their hearts are hard and callous. Iago is [...] an extreme instance of the kind: that is to say, of diseased intellectual activity, with the most perfect indifference to moral good or evil, or rather with a decided preference of the latter, because it falls more readily in with this favourite propensity, gives greater zest to his thoughts and scope to his actions." This interpretation was later admired and built upon by Shakespearean critic A.C. Bradley .

John Kinnaird later commented on Hazlitt's words terming Iago "an amateur of tragedy in real life", pointing out that Bradley and others after him developed the idea that Hazlitt saw Iago as an artist in his own right, "a dramatic artist manqué ". "But the form Iago's will to 'mischief' takes is not primarily aesthetic or creative but practical and critical. Soldier that he is, he has a 'craving after action of the most difficult and dangerous kind,' and he has none of the artist's sympathy with pleasure; his 'licentious' bent is always 'saturnine,' and stems from 'a desire of finding out the worst side of every thing, and of proving himself an over-match for appearances' [...]". David Bromwich later warned against carrying too far the idea that Iago is an artist figure within the play, a representation of Shakespeare himself, as Iago's "genius is [...] the opposite of Shakespeare's. It presents all things in a distorting medium [...]. Iago's peculiar genius is" as Hazlitt represented it, "the exuberance of one part of Shakespeare's mind—not an allegorical representation of the whole of it."

The Tempest , Hazlitt claims, is one of Shakespeare's "most original and perfect" plays, similar in some ways to A Midsummer Night's Dream but finer as a play, if not as rich in poetic passages. The Tempest demonstrates the author to be a master of both comedy and tragedy, with a full command over "all the resources of passion, of wit, of thought, of observation". Yet again, Hazlitt here devotes considerable space to not just the characters in the play, but the character of the play as a whole. The world of the play seems to be created out of nothing; yet, though dream-like, in large part a product of the imagination, its setting resembles that of a painting we may have seen—"Prospero's enchanted island [with its] airy music, the tempest-tost vessel, the turbulent waves, all have the effect of the landscape background of some fine picture" —its poetry having a music that conjures up meaning in the listener's mind—"the songs [...] without conveying any distinct images, seem to recall all the feelings connected with them, like snatches of half-forgotten music heard indistinctly and at intervals" —and its characters, many of whom, like Ariel , we know could not really exist, are drawn so as to seem "as true and natural as [Shakespeare's] real characters". All is so artfully unified that "that part which is only the fantastic creation of his mind, has the same palpable texture, and coheres 'semblably' with the rest."

Hazlitt provides brief appreciative sketches of many of the characters and their relationships. For example:

The courtship between Ferdinand and Miranda is one of the chief beauties of this play. It is the very purity of love. The pretended interference of Prospero with it heightens its interest, and is in character with the magician, whose sense of preternatural power makes him arbitrary, tetchy, and impatient of opposition.

In quoting the speech of the old counselor Gonzalo on the ideal commonwealth he would rule, Hazlitt observes that here "Shakespear has anticipated nearly all the arguments on the Utopian schemes of modern philosophy".

He scrutinises with special interest the characters of Caliban and Ariel, pointing out that, as they arise within the structure of the play, neither could exist without the other, and neither alone illuminates the sum of our nature better than both together. Caliban is gross, of the earth, whereas "Ariel is imaginary power, the swiftness of thought personified."

Shakespear has, as it were by design, drawn off from Caliban the elements of whatever is ethereal and refined, to compound them in the unearthly mould of Ariel. Nothing was ever more finely conceived than this contrast between the material and the spiritual, the gross and delicate.

Hazlitt was particularly interested in Caliban, in part because others thought the character vulgar or evil. Though he is a "savage", "half brute, half demon", and "the essence of grossness", Caliban is not in the least "vulgar". "The character grows out of the soil where it is rooted, uncontrouled, uncouth and wild, uncramped by any of the meannesses of custom [....] Vulgarity is not natural coarseness, but conventional coarseness, learnt from others, contrary to, or without an entire conformity of natural power and disposition; as fashion is the common-place affectation of what is elegant and refined without any feeling of the essence of it." Stephano and Trinculo are vulgar by comparison, and "in conducting [them] to Prospero's cell", by understanding the "nature" by which it is surrounded, "Caliban shews the superiority of natural capacity over greater knowledge and greater folly."

Casting a retrospective light on his interest in Caliban in Characters of Shakespear's Plays , the following year Hazlitt, in a review of "Mr. Coleridge's Lectures", responded indignantly to Coleridge's calling Caliban a "villain", as well as a "Jacobin", who wanted only to spread anarchy. Though speaking somewhat tongue-in-cheek , Hazlitt rises to Caliban's defence: "Caliban is so far from being a prototype of modern Jacobinism, that he is strictly the legitimate sovereign of the isle". Hazlitt did not necessarily believe that Caliban deserved to supplant Prospero as ruler, but he shows that Caliban's very existence raises questions about the fundamental nature of sovereignty, justice, and society itself. As noted by David Bromwich, Coleridge found reasons to apologise for society as it was. Hazlitt, on the other hand, refused to take sides, leaving as open questions the issues that emerged in the play. "It was left to Hazlitt to interpret Caliban's coarseness and the justice of his protests as both alike irreducible."

Hazlitt's commentary on Twelfth Night uses Shakespeare's play to illustrate some of his general ideas about comedy, thoughts that he explored at greater length in later works, such as his Lectures on the English Comic Writers (1819).

Nobody, according to Hazlitt (voicing his disagreement with Dr. Johnson), excelled Shakespeare in tragedy; although his comedies could be first rate, other writers, such as Molière , Cervantes , and Rabelais , excelled him in some types of comedy. It was in the comedy of "Nature" that Shakespeare was supreme. This is not comedy that satirises the "ridiculous" but is rather the comedy of "convivial laughter", which gently mocks human foibles and invites us to share in innocent pleasures.  Of this kind of comedy, Twelfth Night is "one of the most delightful". Unlike the "comedy of artificial life, of wit, of satire," Shakespeare's more gentle comedy "makes us laugh at the follies of mankind, not despise them [...]. Shakespear's comic genius resembles the bee rather in its power of extracting sweets from weeds or poisons, than in leaving a sting behind it."

Besides his further general remarks, Hazlitt lingers appreciatively over a number of amusing scenes and poetic passages, including the songs, all showing how "Shakespear's comedy is of a pastoral and poetical cast. Folly is indigenous to the soil [....] Absurdity has every encouragement afforded it; and nonsense has room to flourish in." Characters of vastly different types are all welcome and fit into his scheme: "the same house is big enough to hold Malvolio , the Countess , Maria, Sir Toby , and Sir Andrew Ague-cheek ." He particularly admires the character of Viola , whom Shakespeare gives many speeches of "impassioned sweetness". Characterising the play as a whole by quoting the author's own words in it—"Shakespear alone could describe the effect of his own poetry."—he reflects that the play's poetry comes " ' o'er the ear like the sweet south/That breathes upon a bank of violets,/Stealing and giving odour. ' "

Here Hazlitt steps back to observe his own character, musing that if he himself were less "saturnine", he might well like the comedies as much as the tragedies, or at least that is how he feels, "after reading [...] parts of this play".

Although Hazlitt had seen As You Like It on stage, he remembered it most fondly from having read it so frequently that he practically had it memorised. In Characters of Shakespear's Plays , he makes no mention at all of any stage performances, treating the play as one primarily meant to be read. What strikes him as most notable about it is its character of a "pastoral drama", one that presents an "ideal" world—that is, a world of thought and imagination, not action. And though it is a comedy, its interest derives not so much from in our being made to laugh at any particular human follies, but rather, "more out of the sentiments and characters than out of the actions or situations. It is not what is done, but what is said, that claims our attention."

"The very air of the place", wrote Hazlitt about the Forest of Arden , "seems to breathe a spirit of philosophical poetry; to stir the thoughts, to touch the heart with pity, as the drowsy forest rustles to the sighing gale", and the character who most embodies the philosophical spirit of the place is Jacques, who "is the only purely contemplative character in Shakespear." Among the lovers, Hazlitt particularly likes the character of Rosalind , "made up of sportive gaiety and natural tenderness". And the couples, Touchstone and Audrey, and Silvius and Phebe, have their different places in the picture. The other characters, including Orlando and the Duke, also come in for their share of commentary. All in all, Hazlitt finds this to be one of the most quotable and quoted of Shakespear's plays: "There is hardly any of Shakespear's plays that contains a greater number of passages that have been quoted in books of extracts, or a greater number of phrases that have become in a manner proverbial."

Hazlitt's concept of the play as one in which the interest is intended to arise not out of the action or situation but rather its contemplative nature has remained a vital one, reaching into the twentieth century, and now the twenty-first.

Measure for Measure has frequently been considered a " problem play ". It was a problem for Hazlitt in that it contains almost no character with whom one can feel complete sympathy. "[T]here is in general a want of passion; the affections are at a stand; our sympathies are reflected and defeated in all directions." Angelo , the Deputy ruler of Vienna, is forgiven by the Duke but draws only Hazlitt's hatred, as "he seems to have a much greater passion for hypocrisy than for his mistress." "Neither are we enamoured of Isabella's rigid chastity, though she could not act otherwise than she did." Isabella's brother Claudio "is the only person who feels naturally", yet even he does not show well in his pleading for life at the sacrifice of his sister's virginity. There is no easy solution for his plight, and "he is placed in circumstances of distress which almost preclude the wish for his deliverance." Over a century later, commentator R.W. Chambers placed Hazlitt as the first of a long line of notable Shakespearean critics who felt the same way, and he quoted Characters of Shakespear's Plays in establishing his contention (as a basis for arguing his own different view of the play) that Hazlitt was among the first of dozens of distinguished critics who could not comprehend how Mariana could love and plead for someone like Angelo, and in general showed a distaste for much in Measure for Measure .

Yet, unlike Coleridge, and despite his own reservations, Hazlitt found much to admire in Measure for Measure , a "play as full of genius as it is of wisdom." He quotes at length passages of "dramatic beauty", and also finds occasion to use this play as an example supporting his characterisation of the general nature of Shakespeare's genius, and the relation between morality and poetry. "Shakespear was in one sense the least moral of all writers; for morality (commonly so called) is made up of antipathies [...]". Yet "in another [sense] he was the greatest of all moralists. He was a moralist in the same sense in which nature is one. He taught what he had learnt from her. He shewed the greatest knowledge of humanity with the greatest fellow-feeling for it."

Although Hazlitt had reviewed a performance of Measure for Measure for The Examiner on 11 February 1816, and incorporated a few passages, with modifications, into this chapter, including some of his general philosophical reflections and a mention of some of Schlegel's opinions, yet he says nothing in Characters of Shakespear's Plays about any stage performances of this play.

Hazlitt believed that because tragedy engages our emotions most profoundly, it is the greatest kind of drama. Of the tragedies based on Greek and Roman history, he ranked Julius Caesar beneath the other Roman tragedies, Coriolanus and Antony and Cleopatra . But, as elsewhere, he expresses admiration for the fine discrimination of character, the depiction of "the manners of the common people, and the jealousies and heart-burnings of the different factions" in Julius Caesar .

In Antony and Cleopatra , "Shakespear's genius has spread over the whole play a richness like the overflowing of the Nile". Overall, this play "presents a fine picture of Roman pride and Eastern magnificence: and in the struggle between the two, the empire of the world seems suspended, 'like the swan's down feather,/That stands upon the swell at full of tide,/And neither way inclines. ' "

Timon of Athens , to Hazlitt "as much a satire as a play", seemed to him "to be written with as intense a feeling of his subject as any one play of Shakespear" and "is the only play of our author in which spleen is the predominant feeling of the mind."

A focal point of Hazlitt's account of Troilus and Cressida is a comparison of the characterisation in this play and that in Chaucer 's poem Troilus and Criseyde (one of Shakespeare's sources). Chaucer's characters are full and well developed; but Chaucer unfolded each character in itself, one at a time. Shakespeare displayed characters as they see themselves as well as how others see them, and showed the effects each has on the others. Shakespeare's characters were so distinctive that it is as if each were expressed by a distinct "faculty" of his mind; and, in effect, these faculties could be viewed as showing "excessive sociability", notable for "how they gossiped and compared notes together." Twentieth-century critic Arthur Eastman thought that, although these remarks did insufficient justice to Chaucer, they were particularly original in revealing "the sophisticated genius of Shakespeare."

For Hazlitt, the essence of Romeo and Juliet is Shakespeare's portrayal of the love that comes with "the ripening of the youthful blood"; and with that love the imagination of the youthful lovers is stirred to dwell not so much on present pleasure but "on all the pleasures they had not experienced. All that was to come of life was theirs. [...] Their hopes were of air, their desires of fire." In many beautiful poetic passages, "the feelings of youth and of the spring are [...] blended together like the breath of opening flowers." Assessing the character of the play as a whole, he states: "This play presents a beautiful coup-d'oeil of the progress of human life. In thought it occupies years, and embraces the circle of the affections from childhood to old age."

In Hazlitt's commentary on King John , his last on any of the history plays , he offers his view of history plays in general: "If we are to indulge our imaginations, we had rather do it upon an imaginary theme; if we are to find subjects for the exercise of our pity and terror, we prefer seeking them in fictitious danger and fictitious distress."

Still, he finds much to appreciate in the history plays: here, it is the weak, vacillating, sometimes contemptible character of King John ; the "comic" but forthright, noble character of Philip the Bastard; the desperation and excess of maternal tenderness in Constance; and many beautiful and affecting passages. Hazlitt also offers some reflections on Shakespeare's versification. There was some controversy over whether this play was genuinely Shakespeare's. He concludes that the verse shows that it certainly was, a judgement borne out by later critics.

Hazlitt remarks that Richard II , less well known than Richard III , is the finer play. Worth noting is the exchange of places between the King and Bolingbroke, the usurping king—"The steps by which Bolingbroke mounts the throne are those by which Richard sinks into the grave"— and he compares the manner and politics of the age with those of his own. Among various poetical passages, he finds the speech of John of Gaunt in praise of England, "one of the most eloquent that ever was penned."

Henry V Hazlitt thought only second-rate among Shakespeare's plays, yet filled with much fine poetry. Regarding the King himself, he considered the character of this "pageant" play entertaining enough, until one compares King Henry with the historical Henry V , who was as barbarous as any of the historical absolute monarchs.

Henry VI , the three parts considered together in one chapter, is not, for Hazlitt, on a level with the other history plays, but, in a long comparison of King Henry VI with King Richard II, he finds occasion to reinforce his major theme of the fine discrimination of superficially similar characters.

Richard III for Hazlitt is preeminently made for acting, "properly a stage play; it belongs to the theatre, rather than to the closet." It is dominated by the character of King Richard, whom Shakespeare portrays as

towering and lofty; equally impetuous and commanding; haughty, violent, and subtle; bold and treacherous; confident in his strength as well as in his cunning; raised high by his birth, and higher by his talents and his crimes; a royal usurper, a princely hypocrite, a tyrant, and a murderer of the house of Plantagenet.

Hazlitt comments on the efforts of several actors in playing the role, particularly Kean. Portions of his review of Kean's first performance as Richard, written for The Morning Chronicle of 15 February 1814, were incorporated into this chapter.

Differing with Dr. Johnson, who found nothing of genius in Henry VIII but the depiction of the " ' meek sorrows and virtuous distress ' " of Queen Katherine, Hazlitt finds in this play, though not one of Shakespeare's greatest, "considerable interest of a more mild and thoughtful cast, and some of the most striking passages in the author's works." In addition to the portrayal of Katherine, Hazlitt likes that of Cardinal Wolsey and of King Henry himself, which, though "drawn with great truth and spirit [is] like a very disagreeable portrait, sketched by the hand of a master." And "the scene of [the Duke of] Buckingham led to execution is one of the most affecting and natural in Shakespear, and one to which there is hardly an approach in any other author."

Reflecting on Twelfth Night , Hazlitt considered that his own preference for tragedy could be in part due to his own "saturnine" temperament, and asserted that, regardless of individual preferences, Shakespeare was as skilled in comedy as in tragedy. With this acknowledgement, he had quite a few appreciative comments to make about the comedies.

Hazlitt found sheer delight in A Midsummer Night's Dream , especially relishing its playfully inventive poetry and quoting at length several of his favourite passages. He also considers how it exhibits the fine discrimination of character to be found everywhere in Shakespeare. As elsewhere, he crosses the boundaries of plays and enumerates subtle differences between even the fairy characters, in this case in an extensive comparison of Puck in this play and Ariel in The Tempest .

This is one play that Hazlitt felt cannot be properly represented on stage. Its beauties are primarily those of poetry: "Poetry and the stage do not agree well together. The ideal can have no place upon the stage, which is a picture without perspective. [...] Where all is left to the imagination (as is the case in reading) every circumstance [...] has an equal chance of being kept in mind, and tells according to the mixed impression of all that has been suggested."

Although the early play The Two Gentlemen of Verona seemed to Hazlitt like "little more than the first outlines of a comedy loosely sketched in", he also found in it "passages of high poetical spirit, and of inimitable quaintness of humour".

Hazlitt proclaims The Winter's Tale as "one of the best-acting of our author's plays", and recalls with delight some of his favourite actors who played the parts, including Sarah Siddons and John Kemble. He notes the incisive psychology of the unfolding of King Leontes 's madness, the appealing roguery of Autolycus, and the charm of Perdita 's and Florizel 's speeches, after wondering how it could be that Pope doubted the authenticity of the play as Shakespeare's.

Hazlitt thought All's Well that Ends Well to be a particularly "pleasing" play, though less as a comedy than as a serious dramatisation of an original tale by Boccaccio . Helena is a noble example of womanhood, and, in the comic part of the play, Hazlitt is especially amused by the character of Parolles, the "parasite and hanger on of [Count] Bertram's whose "folly, boasting, and cowardice [... and] false pretensions to bravery and honour" are unmasked in "a very amusing episode." The source of Shakespeare's play leads Hazlitt to digress at length on the writing of Boccaccio, who had never had "justice [...] done him by the world."

Love's Labour's Lost , thought Hazlitt, "transports us quite as much to the manners of the court, and the quirks of the courts of law, as to the scenes of nature or the fairy-land of [Shakespeare's] own imagination. Shakespear has set himself to imitate the tone of polite conversation then prevailing among the fair, the witty, and the learned". "If we were to part with any of the author's comedies", he writes, "it should be this." Yet he also mentions many amusing characters, dramatic scenes, and noble lines of poetry he would not willingly part with, quoting at length long passages spoken by both Biron and by Rosaline.

Much Ado About Nothing Hazlitt found to be an "admirable comedy", neatly balancing the comic against more serious matter. He reflects, "Perhaps that middle point of comedy was never more nicely hit in which the ludicrous blends with the tender, and our follies, turning round against themselves in support of our affections, retain nothing but their humanity."

The Taming of the Shrew Hazlitt sums up very simply as "almost the only one of Shakespear's comedies that has a regular plot, and downright moral [....] It shows admirably how self-will is only to be got the better of by stronger will, and how one degree of ridiculous perversity is only to be driven out by another still greater."

While The Comedy of Errors has a few passages "which bear the decided stamp of [Shakespeare's] genius", Hazlitt for the most part characterises it as "taken very much from the Menaechmi of Plautus , and is not an improvement on it."

Hazlitt ends his detailed account of the plays with a chapter on "Doubtful Plays of Shakespear", the greater part of which consists of direct quotations from Schlegel, whose remarks Hazlitt finds worth considering, if he does not always agree with them. Most of the plays now accepted as Shakespeare's, or at least partly by Shakespeare, were also accepted as his by Hazlitt. The two notable exceptions were Titus Andronicus and Pericles, Prince of Tyre . Of the former, Hazlitt nevertheless respected Schlegel's defence of it enough to quote the latter at length. And he allows that some parts of Pericles could have been by Shakespeare but more likely were "imitations" of Shakespeare "by some contemporary poet."

Hazlitt felt compelled to add to his commentary on the plays some words on Shakespeare's nondramatic poetry, in the chapter "Poems and Sonnets". While he liked a few of the sonnets, for the most part Hazlitt found Shakespeare's nondramatic poetry to be artificial, mechanical, and, overall, "laboured, uphill work." On the whole, wrote Hazlitt, "Our idolatry of Shakespear [...] ceases with his plays."

Characters of Shakespear's Plays argues against a century and a half of criticism that saw Shakespeare as a "child of nature", deficient in art and full of faults. To anchor his position, Hazlitt makes an observation by the poet Alexander Pope—despite Pope's being one of those very critics—his unifying theme: "every single character in Shakespear, is as much an individual, as those in life itself", and he explores the Shakespearean art that, as much as observation of nature, brought those characters to life.

Much of the book synthesises Hazlitt's own views with those of his predecessors in Shakespearean criticism. The greatest of these critics was August Wilhelm Schlegel, the contemporary German literary scholar and critic who also heavily influenced Coleridge and who Hazlitt believed appreciated Shakespeare better than any English critic. "Certainly no writer among ourselves", wrote Hazlitt, "has shown either the same admiration of his genius, or the same philosophical acuteness in pointing out his characteristic excellences."

Hazlitt also merges with his presentation, in a general way, the approach of his immediate British predecessors, the "character critics", like Maurice Morgann, who had begun to take a psychological approach, focusing on how the characters in the plays behave and think like people we know in real life.

In this vein, each of Hazlitt's essays incorporates numerous often very personal commentaries on the characters. For example, in the account of Cymbeline , he announces, "We have almost as great an affection for Imogen as she had for Posthumus; and she deserves it better." And comparing Falstaff with Prince Hal, he proclaims, "Falstaff is the better man of the two." Commenting on "the character of Hamlet", he in effect joins a discussion among his contemporaries, adding to the mix of similar assessments by Goethe , Schlegel, and Coleridge his observation that Hamlet "is not a character marked by strength of will or even of passion, but by refinement of thought and sentiment."

Although Hazlitt's attention to "characters" in this manner was not original, and was later criticised, he built upon the approach, adding his own conceptions of how Shakespeare presented human nature and experience.

One idea, elaborating on his originally stated theme, to which Hazlitt returns several times—in Macbeth , A Midsummer Night's Dream , Henry IV , and elsewhere—is that Shakespeare does not only create highly individual characters. More than any other dramatist, he creates characters that are of similar general types, and yet, as in real life, differ in subtle ways:

Shakespear was scarcely more remarkable for the force and marked contrasts of his characters than for the truth and subtlety with which he has distinguished those which approached the nearest to each other. For instance, the soul of Othello is hardly more distinct from that of Iago than that of Desdemona is shewn to be from AEmilia's; the ambition of Macbeth is as distinct from the ambition of Richard III. as it is from the meekness of Duncan; the real madness of Lear is as different from the feigned madness of Edgar as from the babbling of the fool [...].

In the classical view, through at least Dr. Johnson, poetry "holds a mirror up to nature". The Romantics began to shift the focus to the role of the imagination. In common with his Romantic contemporaries, Hazlitt focuses on how, to communicate the meaning of the play, Shakespeare's imagination, by the medium of poetry, stimulates the reader's or audience's imagination. Several times, Hazlitt observes how Shakespeare by this imaginative construction seemed to become each character in turn. For example, in "Antony and Cleopatra" he stops to observe, "The characters breathe, move, and live. Shakespear [...] becomes them, and speaks and acts for them." And in "Henry IV": "He appears to have been all the characters, and in all the situations he describes."

We as readers or audience appreciate the characters by the force of our imagination's seeming to participate in the scene, as if we were present during such an event in real life. Commenting on the scene in Julius Caesar where Caesar confides to Marc Antony his apprehensions about Cassius, Hazlitt writes: "We know hardly any passage more expressive of the genius of Shakespeare than this. It is as if he had been actually present, had known the different characters and what they thought of one another, and had taken down what he heard and saw, their looks, words, and gestures, just as they happened." In "Hamlet", he observes that "the characters think and speak and act just as they might do, if left entirely to themselves. [...] The whole play is an exact transcript of what might be supposed to have taken place at the court of Denmark [...]."

In "Troilus and Cressida", by a comparison with Chaucer's method of depicting character, he explains in detail how Shakespeare's idea of "character" is not fixed, and Shakespeare shows the characters not only by their own behaviour but as they view and react to one another. Likewise, Shakespeare's attention was not merely to habitual outward behaviour, but to the most transitory, fleeting inward impressions. "Shakespear exhibited [...] not only what things are in themselves, but whatever they might seem to be, their different reflections, their endless combinations."

At times, Shakespeare's illumination of his characters' inner life was so strong that Hazlitt believed no stage presentation could do justice to Shakespeare's conception. In "Lear" he approvingly quotes his friend Charles Lamb's argument that, in general, Shakespeare's plays are unsuited for the stage. The thought crops up repeatedly that "[t]he stage is not in general the best place to study our author's characters in." And elsewhere, "Poetry and the stage do not agree well together." In such statements, he approached the position of Lamb (to whom he dedicated Characters of Shakespear's Plays ), who felt that no stage presentation could do justice to Shakespearean drama, that the artifice of the stage interposes a barrier between the author's conception and the audience's imagination. As critic John Mahoney put it, to both Lamb and Hazlitt, "the performance of Shakespeare in a theatre must always be disappointing to an extent because the slightest departure from the vision conjured by the imagination is so immediately detected and so quickly a source of aesthetic displeasure."

Certain plays in particular fall into the category of those unfitted for the stage, for example, A Midsummer Night's Dream and Hamlet . Particularly in the greatest tragedies, this inner focus is so strong that Hazlitt again advances beyond the idea of individual character to that of the "logic of passion" —powerful emotions experienced interactively, illuminating our common human nature. This idea is developed in Hazlitt's accounts of King Lear , Othello , and Macbeth .

At least partly explaining why both Lamb and Hazlitt felt the inadequacy of Shakespearean stage performances was that the theatres themselves were huge and gaudy, audiences were noisy and unmannerly, and dramatic presentations in the early nineteenth century were sensationalistic, laden with artificial and showy props. In addition, unless one sat down in the pit , one could easily miss the subtleties of the actors' facial and vocal expressions.

For all his insistence that justice could not be done to Shakespeare's plays on stage, Hazlitt frequently made exceptions. A devoted playgoer from an early age, and now a drama critic, he relished many of the stage performances he had witnessed. In some cases, as with Edmund Kean (to whom he refers frequently in this book, usually with admiration) and Sarah Siddons (he could "conceive of nothing grander" than her performance as Lady Macbeth ), their interpretations of roles in Shakespearean drama left indelible impressions, extending his ideas of the potential of the characters represented. For example, in "Romeo and Juliet" he proclaims, "Perhaps one of the finest pieces of acting that ever was witnessed on the stage, is Mr. Kean's manner of doing this scene [when Romeo is banished] [...] He treads close indeed upon the genius of his author."

Hazlitt throughout his book seems to waver between these two opinions—that frequently the actors offer the best interpretations of Shakespeare, and that no view of Shakespeare on stage can match the rich experience of reading the plays—without acknowledging the apparent contradiction.

Some plays he considered to be especially suitable for the stage, such as The Winter's Tale , which he declares to be "one of the best-acting of our author's plays". Here he recalls some acting triumphs he had witnessed long ago: "Mrs. Siddons played Hermione, and in the last scene acted the painted statue to the life—with true monumental dignity and noble passion; Mr. Kemble, in Leontes, worked himself up into a very fine classical phrensy; and Bannister, as Autolycus, roared as loud for pity as a sturdy beggar could do who felt none of the pain he counterfeited, and was sound of wind and limb."

Richard III for Hazlitt was another that was "properly a stage-play", and in that chapter "criticise[s] it chiefly with a reference to the manner in which we have seen it performed", and then compares various actors' interpretations of the character of King Richard: "If Mr. Kean does not entirely succeed in concentrating all the lines of the character, as drawn by Shakespear [...] [h]e is more refined than Cooke ; more bold, varied, and original than Kemble in the same character."

Hazlitt also objects to the way Richard III was frequently edited for the stage at that time. "To make room for [...] worse than needless additions" from other plays, often not by Shakespeare, "many of the most striking passages in the real play have been omitted by the foppery and ignorance of the prompt-book critics." Viewing it as the stage presentation of a story, he finds this play is damaged by these manipulations, as, in Shakespeare's original, the "arrangement and developement of the story, and the mutual contrast and combination of the dramatis personae , are in general as finely managed as the developement of the characters or the expression of the passions." He remarks on another kind of editing—what would soon become known as " Bowdlerisation "—in the treatment of a passage in Romeo and Juliet in which the frank speech of Juliet alarmed the prudes of his day. He quotes the passage, commenting that "we have no doubt that it has been expunged from the Family Shakespear."

Story development and "the business of the plot" are scrutinised in several chapters. "Shakespear excelled in the openings of his plays: that of Macbeth is the most striking of any." Commenting on the " developement of the catastrophe" in Cymbeline , he takes occasion to note that the contention of Dr. Johnson that "Shakespear was generally inattentive to the winding-up of his plots", is so far from being true that in King Lear , Romeo and Juliet , Macbeth , Othello , and Hamlet , among "other plays of less moment [...] the last act is crowded with decisive events brought about by natural and striking means." Hazlitt will frequently offer a brief sketch of the story and stop to note particular excellences of Shakespeare's technique. He thus finds the "whole of the trial scene" in The Merchant of Venice to be "a master-piece of dramatic skill."

Occasionally Hazlitt also discusses the plays from yet other perspectives. Shakespeare's reliance on earlier source material comes into consideration in "Coriolanus" and "All's Well that Ends Well" in particular. Repeatedly, Hazlitt focuses on scenes as they were staged. In the words of Arthur Eastman, he "reads the plays like a director, quick to detect cues as to motion, gesture, costume." Remarking on Hazlitt's "theatrical sense", Eastman says that "it's not simply the physical that Hazlitt has in mind—it's the whole interrelationship of one person with another, one mind with other minds—presences both physical and psychological upon a stage."

In line with Schlegel, more than with any previous English-language critic (except Coleridge, who also followed Schlegel), Hazlitt found "unity" in Shakespeare's plays not in their observing the traditional classical unities of time, place, and action, but in their unity of theme. His most complete elaboration of this idea is in his chapter on Antony and Cleopatra :

The jealous attention which has been paid to the unities both of time and place has taken away the principle of perspective in the drama, and all the interest which objects derive from distance, from contrast, from privation, from change of fortune, from long-cherished passion; and contrasts our view of life from a strange and romantic dream, long, obscure, and infinite, into a smartly contested, three hours' inaugural disputation on its merits by the different candidates for theatrical applause.

In the discussion of Macbeth , it is Macbeth's unity of character that is significant. In many chapters, he emphasises the dominant mood, a unifying theme, the "character" of the play as a whole. In, again, Macbeth , the entire play "is done upon a stronger and more systematic principle of contrast than any other of Shakespear's plays." He notes that "a certain tender gloom overspreads the whole" of Cymbeline . Romeo and Juliet shows "the whole progress of human life" in which "one generation pushes another off the stage." Reading A Midsummer Night's Dream "is like wandering in a grove by moonlight: the descriptions breathe a sweetness like odours thrown from beds of flowers."

Another earlier criticism of Shakespeare, that his writing was not "moral", was still alive in Hazlitt's day. Coleridge frequently emphasised the immorality of characters like Falstaff. To Hazlitt, this was entirely the wrong approach to take to morality in the medium of dramatic poetry, and he stops from time to time to comment on Shakespeare's morality. In considering Hamlet , for example, he declares that the character of Hamlet should not be judged by ordinary moral rules. "The ethical delineations of" Shakespeare "do not exhibit the drab-coloured quakerism of morality." In " Measure for Measure " he remarks that Shakespeare's morality is to be judged as that of nature itself: "He taught what he had learnt from her. He shewed the greatest knowledge of humanity with the greatest fellow-feeling for it." Shakespeare's "talent consisted in sympathy with human nature, in all its shapes, degrees, depressions, and elevations", and this attitude could be considered immoral only if one considers morality to be "made up of antipathies".

Scattered throughout the chapters are more general critical discussions, such as that on tragedy in the essay "Othello", comedy in "Twelfth Night", and the value for human life of poetry in general, in "Lear", among many others. Along the way, Hazlitt intersperses lengthy quotations from the plays, sharing with the reader poetic passages he thought particularly excellent. This practice resembled the by then common practice of collecting long extracts from the plays as the "beauties" of Shakespeare. Hazlitt, however, also adds critical commentary (though often far less extensive than would become the practice in later years), with the quotations illustrating particular points about the plays as well as sharing with his readers what he thought worthy of attention. All this, done as no one had before, made Characters of Shakespear's Plays the first handbook for the study and appreciation of all of Shakespeare's plays.

Characters of Shakespear's Plays was Hazlitt's most successful book. As he had circulated advance copies before publication, it was noticed favourably before it formally appeared on 9 July 1817. Leigh Hunt proclaimed enthusiastically that "it is the least of all its praises to say that it must inevitably supersede the dogmatical and half-informed criticisms of Johnson."

After publication, not all of the reaction was this positive. The Tory British Critic sniped that the book was "stuffed with dull, common-place, Jacobin declamation", and The Quarterly Review , with the same political bias, rebuked Hazlitt for his uncomplimentary portrayal of King Henry VIII. But for the most part, the praise continued. Hunt, in a fuller review in The Examiner , applauded not only the author's enthusiasm  "but the very striking susceptibility with which he changes his own humour and manner according to the nature of the play he comes upon; like a spectator in a theatre, who accompanies the turns of the actor's face with his own." John Hamilton Reynolds, reviewing it in The Champion , went so far as to claim that "This is the only work ever written on Shakespeare that can be deemed worthy of Shakespeare".

The first edition sold out in six weeks. It was only some months afterward that the voice of Francis Jeffrey, the highly respected editor of The Edinburgh Review , was heard. Jeffrey began by expressing reservations: this is not a book of great learning and less a book of criticism than of appreciation. And yet, Jeffrey concedes, the "appreciation" is of the highest kind, and he is "not [...] much inclined to disagree with" Hazlitt "after reading his eloquent exposition" of the points he makes about Shakespeare. "The book [...] is written less to tell the reader what Mr. H. knows about Shakespeare or his writings, than to explain to them what he feels about them—and why he feels so—and thinks that all who profess to love poetry should feel so likewise." While Characters does not "show extraordinary knowledge of [Shakespeare's] production" it nevertheless shows "very considerable originality and genius."

On 30 May 1818, a second edition appeared, this time published by Taylor and Hessey. At first this sold well. At that time, however, literary criticism was subject to exceptionally strong political influences. In particular, the most unscrupulous of the Tory periodicals did not hesitate to indulge in barefaced lies to discredit adherents of what they considered unacceptable political views. Hazlitt, never reticent about criticising kings or government ministers, soon became a target. Only a little more than a week had passed when the Quarterly Review "delivered a diabolical notice of Characters of Shakespeare's Plays —possibly by its editor, William Gifford ." (It could have actually been by a certain John Russell, writing anonymously; but Hazlitt laid the blame on Gifford, who was responsible for the journal's contents and may have encouraged Russell.) Gifford, or Russell, sliding from literary criticism into character assassination, wrote:

We should not have condescended to notice the senseless and wicked sophistry of this writer [...] had we not considered him as one of the representatives of a class of men by whom literature is more than at any former period disgraced [...] it might not be unprofitable to show how small a portion of talent and literature was necessary for carrying on the trade of sedition. [Hazlitt had dared to criticise the character of King Henry VIII.] The few specimens which we have selected of his ethics and his criticism are more than sufficient to prove that Mr. Hazlitt's knowledge of Shakespeare and the English language is exactly on a par with the purity of his morals and the depth of his understanding.

Sales completely dried up. Hazlitt got the chronology a bit wrong but was otherwise not exaggerating when he wrote in 1821:

Taylor and Hessey told me that they had sold nearly two editions of the Characters of Shakespear's Plays in about three months, but that after the Quarterly Review of them came out, they never sold another copy.

The attacks in the Tory periodicals, soon extended to other works by Hazlitt, killed not merely the sales of Characters of Shakespear's Plays but, as far as much of the general public was concerned, his reputation as a literary critic.

Though the influence of Hazlitt's only full-length treatment of Shakespeare somewhat receded, it did not completely die out. Hazlitt's son and grandson brought out editions of Hazlitt's works later in the century. His miscellaneous and familiar essays were read, and Hazlitt was commended as a stylist by a discerning few. As a critic, though he had passed out of the public eye, an even more select few understood how high a place he deserved in the ranking of literary critics. William Makepeace Thackeray , for example, praised Hazlitt in 1844 as "one of the keenest and brightest critics that ever lived." Another rare exception was the Scottish journalist Alexander Ireland , who in a brief memoir of Hazlitt in 1889 wrote that Hazlitt's book on Shakespeare, "although it professes to be dramatic criticism, is in reality a discourse on the philosophy of life and human nature, more suggestive than many approved treatises expressly devoted to that subject."

For the most part, although Hazlitt continued to be read and his influence was to a degree felt, he was throughout most of the remainder of the nineteenth century infrequently cited as a critic.

Around the turn of the twentieth century, the influence of Characters began to be exerted more explicitly, notably in the studies of critic A.C. Bradley, who approvingly adopted Hazlitt's explanation of the character of Iago. At about this time, George Saintsbury , who wrote a comprehensive history of English criticism (finished in 1904), recorded his extreme distaste for Hazlitt's character, and, as noted by critic Elisabeth Schneider, found his writings "filled with vast ignorance, errors, prejudice, and an unpleasantness of temper amounting almost to insanity". Yet he also ranked Hazlitt high as a critic, among the greatest in the language. Characters he placed lower than some of Hazlitt's other critical works; yet he allowed that, aside from such "outbursts" as his railing against the historical King Henry V, and his over-reliance on quotation from Schlegel, Characters of Shakespear's Plays is filled with much that is admirable, notably Hazlitt's comparison of Chaucer's and Shakespeare's characterisation and his observation that Shakespeare "has no prejudices for or against his characters". Saintsbury found Hazlitt's critical judgements sound as a rule, and he thought that the characterisations of Falstaff and Shylock were "masterpieces".

Even as the "character" critics began to fall out of favour, and Hazlitt, who was lumped together with them, was also pushed aside, some influence remained. Hazlitt's general approach to Shakespeare's plays, in conveying the prevailing mood, the character of the play itself, had its influence on later twentieth-century critics, like G. Wilson Knight. Other major Shakespeareans, like John Dover Wilson, would occasionally refer approvingly to one of Hazlitt's insights or notable passages, such as the characterisation of Falstaff.

Hazlitt's Shakespearean criticism continued to find some acceptance from then on, yet a stigma still hung about his character, and his criticism was often judged to be overly emotional and "impressionistic". This attitude changed only gradually. In 1955, René Wellek , in his history of literary criticism in all Western culture for the previous two centuries, largely supported these earlier views. Characters , to him, centres excessively on Shakespeare's characters and, worse, Hazlitt "confuses fiction and reality" and discusses fictional characters as though they were real people. Yet he also notes, a half-century after Saintsbury, and following Schneider's lead, that for all of Hazlitt's impressionism, "there is more theory in Hazlitt than is generally realised." He also thought that Hazlitt shows considerable "psychological acumen" in explaining certain types of characters, such as Iago, and that Hazlitt's "character sketch of Iago is superior to Coleridge's". He also praises Hazlitt's freedom, in Characters and elsewhere, from "the defects which infected his nearest critical rivals, Johnson and Coleridge: chauvinism, prudery, and unctuous sermonising. [...] He is free of the prudery which in his day pervaded English culture."

Contemporaneously, Walter Jackson Bate , a critic specialising in the English Romantic period, voiced his approval of Hazlitt's Shakespearean criticism, seen in the context of that of other Romantics. "Like Coleridge [...] or [...] Keats", wrote Bate, "Hazlitt had the characteristic romantic delight in Shakespeare's ability to unveil character in a single passage or even a single line—in 'flashes of passion' that offer a 'revelation as it were of the whole context of our being. ' "

More attention soon came to Hazlitt's book. Lionel Trilling was the first critic to recognise the importance of Hazlitt's radically new idea about poetry as expressed in his essay on Coriolanus . Herschel Baker in 1962 noted that the best parts of Hazlitt's book, such as the "stirring essays on Othello and Macbeth ", place "Hazlitt near the top of those who have written greatly on the greatest of all writers."

In 1968, Arthur M. Eastman published a retrospective study of 350 years of Shakespearean criticism. At that time, it still seemed necessary to apologise for including Hazlitt among the major Shakespearean critics of his age. But in A Short History of Shakespearean Criticism , Eastman finally concludes that, although much of what Hazlitt says about Shakespeare is not original, it "is well enough said to find a place in the story."

Before Eastman finishes, however, he enumerates several things that Hazlitt did formulate in an original manner. Besides such memorable expressions as "It is we who are Hamlet", Hazlitt, like no critic before him, was supremely attentive to "the whole interrelationship of one person with another, one mind with other minds—presences both physical and psychological upon a stage." With this focus on what Hazlitt had to say about Shakespeare's stagecraft and the way his plays were acted, Eastman thus rescued him from the opprobrium of being associated, in the most superficial way, with the "character" critics. Differing from his contemporaries Lamb and Coleridge, "Hazlitt [...] brings to Shakespeare both a drama critic's sense of the plays as theatre and a closet critic's sense that the theatre of the mind so far surpasses that of the stage that certain of the plays can only be acted there."

Eastman also points to Hazlitt's focus on the underlying unity of the plays. Hazlitt may not have done this as well as Coleridge (who, Eastman thought, was better at suggesting avenues of approach for others to find unity in Shakespeare's plays), "Yet the demonstrations of unity in Cymbeline and Othello and King Lear make us see what otherwise we might not." Eastman also rescues Hazlitt's political commentary, which, however abrasive it might be, "opens such questions" for general discussion, "so that the politics of the plays enters into the arena of interpretation in a new and dignified way."

Overall, Eastman concludes, despite the book's many shortcomings, Characters of Shakespear's Plays was the "best handbook" of its century for the study of Shakespeare's plays.

It remained for John Kinnaird in his 1978 full-length study of Hazlitt as thinker and critic to reconcile Hazlitt as "character" critic with Hazlitt as drama critic. Hazlitt was a character critic to an extent; but he was also a dramatic critic who paid attention to staging and dramatic form. And even his character criticism transcended the focus on individual characters to create "a larger study of the ways of dramatic imagination ". In the course of his study of Shakespeare, Hazlitt, as Kinnaird points out, also shows how it is Shakespeare's "art" that enables him to represent "nature", dismissing the older critical view that Shakespeare was a "child of nature" but deficient in "art".

Kinnaird further delves into the ideas in Characters of Shakespear's Plays , especially that of "power" as involved in Shakespeare's plays and as investigated by Hazlitt, not only the power in physical force but the power of imagination in sympathising with physical force, which at times can overcome our will to the good. He explores Hazlitt's accounts of Shakespeare's tragedies— Macbeth , Hamlet , Othello , King Lear , and especially Coriolanus —where he shows that Hazlitt reveals that our love of power in sympathising with what can involve evil can overcome the human desire for the good. This, Kinnaird points out, has serious implications in considering the meaning and purpose of tragic literature in general.

Along the way, Kinnaird notes the influence of Characters on later Shakespearean criticism, including that of A.C. Bradley, G. Wilson Knight, and C.L. Barber.

Hazlitt, concludes, Kinnaird, was too often misunderstood and dismissed as no more than a "character" critic. But his contribution to Shakespeare studies was much broader and deeper than that, and, despite problems with some of Hazlitt's own theories, Characters of Shakespear's Plays was a "seminal" work.

By this time, a revival of interest in Hazlitt was well under way. Only a few years later, in 1983, in his study of Hazlitt as critic, David Bromwich considers at length some issues involving Characters of Shakespear's Plays . Against some allegations to the contrary in earlier studies of Hazlitt, Bromwich concludes that Hazlitt borrowed little from Coleridge, and he presents several contrasts in their critical views, particularly about Shakespeare, as evidence. In extended discussions of Hazlitt's critical treatment of the character of Iago in Othello , of Shylock in The Merchant of Venice , of Caliban in The Tempest , of Hamlet , and, at great length, of Coriolanus , he uses the contrast between Coleridge's criticism and Hazlitt's to highlight the essential originality of Hazlitt's critical stance, and he observes that Hazlitt's views frequently provide a bracing alternative to Coleridge's. He also delves into the issue of Hazlitt's influence on Keats partly by means of Characters , particularly the chapter on King Lear , and he finds in Hazlitt's comments on Lear interesting contrasts and similarities with the critical views of Wordsworth and Shelley. Building upon the arguments advanced by Kinnaird, Bromwich further challenges the "reductive" notion that Characters was simply a work of "character" criticism.

Sustained by the accelerated revival of interest in Hazlitt toward the close of the twentieth century, the legacy of Characters of Shakespear's Plays has been valued increasingly as well. In 1994 Harold Bloom, in voicing his appreciation of Hazlitt's accounts of Coriolanus and of Edmund in King Lear , ranked Hazlitt second only to Dr. Johnson as an English-language literary critic. He echoed and reinforced that assessment in his 2008 edition of Othello . Other new editions of Shakespeare also look back to Hazlitt's interpretations of his plays. In 2000, Jonathan Arac in The Cambridge History of Literary Criticism placed Hazlitt with Schlegel and Coleridge as distinguished Shakespearean critics of their age and noted his study of Shakespeare as one of the "landmarks that still serve as points of departure for fresh thinking nearly two centuries later." In 2006, with Hazlitt's full reinstatement as a major Shakespearean critic, philosopher Colin McGinn based an entire book about Shakespeare's plays on Hazlitt's idea that Shakespeare was a "philosophical" poet.

A major financial crisis took place in Iceland between 2008 and 2010. It involved the default of all three of the country's major privately owned commercial banks in late 2008, following problems in refinancing their short-term debt and a run on deposits in the Netherlands and the United Kingdom . Relative to the size of its economy, Iceland's systemic banking collapse was the largest of any country in economic history. The crisis led to a severe recession and the 2009 Icelandic financial crisis protests .

In the years preceding the crisis, three Icelandic banks, Kaupthing , Landsbanki and Glitnir , multiplied in size. This expansion was driven by ready access to credit in international financial markets, in particular money markets . As the 2008 financial crisis unfolded, investors perceived the Icelandic banks to be increasingly risky. Trust in the banks gradually faded, leading to a sharp depreciation of the Icelandic króna in 2008 and increased difficulties for the banks in rolling over their short-term debt. At the end of the second quarter of 2008, Iceland's external debt was 9.553 trillion Icelandic krónur (€50 billion), more than 7 times the GDP of Iceland in 2007. The assets of the three banks totaled 14.437 trillion krónur at the end of the second quarter 2008, equal to more than 11 times the national GDP. Due to the huge size of the Icelandic financial system in comparison with the Icelandic economy, the Central Bank of Iceland was unable to act as a lender of last resort during the crisis, further aggravating the mistrust in the banking system.

On 29 September 2008, it was announced that Glitnir would be nationalised. However, subsequent efforts to restore faith in the banking system failed. On 6 October, the Icelandic legislature instituted an emergency law which enabled the Financial Supervisory Authority (FME) to take control over financial institutions and made domestic deposits in the banks priority claims. In the following days, new banks were founded to take over the domestic operations of Kaupthing, Landsbanki and Glitnir. The old banks were put into receivership and liquidation, resulting in losses for their shareholders and foreign creditors . Outside Iceland, more than half a million depositors lost access to their accounts in foreign branches of Icelandic banks. This led to the 2008–2013 Icesave dispute , which ended with an EFTA Court ruling that Iceland was not obliged to repay Dutch and British depositors minimum deposit guarantees .

In an effort to stabilize the situation, the Icelandic government stated that all domestic deposits in Icelandic banks would be guaranteed, imposed strict capital controls to stabilize the value of the Icelandic króna, and secured a US$5.1bn sovereign debt package from the IMF and the Nordic countries in order to finance a budget deficit and the restoration of the banking system. The international bailout support programme led by IMF officially ended on 31 August 2011, while the capital controls which were imposed in November 2008 were lifted on 14 March 2017.

The financial crisis had a serious negative impact on the Icelandic economy . The national currency fell sharply in value, foreign currency transactions were virtually suspended for weeks, and the market capitalisation of the Icelandic stock exchange fell by more than 90%. Iceland underwent a severe economic depression . Its gross domestic product dropped by 10% in real terms between the third quarter of 2007 and the third quarter of 2010. A new era with positive GDP growth started in 2011, and has helped foster a gradually declining trend for the unemployment rate. The government budget deficit has declined from 9.7% of GDP in 2009 and 2010 to 0.2% of GDP in 2014; the central government gross debt-to-GDP ratio was expected to decline to less than 60% in 2018 from a maximum of 85% in 2011.

The Icelandic króna declined more than 35% against the euro from January to September 2008. Inflation of consumer prices was running at 14%, and Iceland's interest rates had been raised to 15.5% to deal with the high inflation.

On the night of Wednesday, 8 October 2008, the Central Bank of Iceland abandoned its attempt to peg the Icelandic króna at 131 krónur to the euro after trying to set this peg on 6 October. By 9 October, the Icelandic króna was trading at 340 to the euro when trading in the currency collapsed due to the FME's takeover of the last major Icelandic bank, and thus the loss of all króna trade ' clearing houses '. The next day, the central bank introduced restrictions on the purchase of foreign currency within Iceland. From 9 October to 5 November, the European Central Bank quoted a reference rate of 305 krónur to the euro.

The Central Bank of Iceland set up a temporary system of daily currency auctions on 15 October to facilitate international trade. The value of the króna is determined by supply and demand in these auctions. The first auction sold €25 million at a rate of 150 krónur to the euro. Commercial króna trading outside Iceland restarted on 28 October, at an exchange rate of 240 krónur to the euro, after Icelandic interest rates had been raised to 18%. The foreign exchange reserves of the Central Bank of Iceland fell by US$289 million during October 2008.

During November, the real exchange rate (discounting inflation) of the Icelandic króna, as quoted by the Central Bank of Iceland, was roughly one-third lower than the average rate from 1980 to 2008, and 20% lower than the historical lows during the same period. The external rate as quoted by the European Central Bank was lower still. On the last trading day of the month, 28 November, the Central Bank of Iceland was quoting 182.5 krónur to the euro, while the European Central Bank was quoting 280 krónur to the euro.

On 28 November, the Central Bank of Iceland and the Minister for Business Affairs agreed on a new set of currency regulations, replacing the central bank's restrictions imposed early on in the crisis. Movements of capital to and from Iceland were banned without a license from the central bank. It was estimated at this time that foreign investors held some €2.9 billion in króna-denominated securities, popularly known as "glacier bonds".

The foreign exchange rules also oblige Icelandic residents to deposit any new foreign currency they receive with an Icelandic bank. There is anecdotal evidence that some Icelandic exporters had been operating an informal offshore foreign exchange market, trading pounds and euros for krónur outside the control of any regulator and starving the onshore market of foreign currency. Hence the Central Bank had to sell €124 million of currency reserves in November 2008 to make up the difference, compared with an estimated trade surplus of €13.9 million.

The last currency auction was held on 3 December. The domestic interbank foreign exchange market reopened the following day with three market makers , all of them government-owned. On the first two days of domestic trading, the króna climbed to 153.3 to the euro, up 22% against the last currency auction rate. [ citation needed ]

In January 2009, the exchange rate of Icelandic króna against Euro seemed to be more stabilized compared with the situation in October 2008, with the lowest rate at 177.5 krónur per EUR on 1, 3 and 4 January 2009, and the highest at 146.8 on 30 January 2009. In the meantime, however, Iceland's 12-month inflation in January 2009 climbed to a record high of 18.6%.

In September 2008, internal documents from Kaupthing , the largest bank in Iceland, were leaked to WikiLeaks . On 29 September 2008, a plan was announced for the bank Glitnir to be nationalised by the Icelandic government with the purchase of a 75% stake for €600 million. The government stated that it did not intend to hold ownership of the bank for a long period, and that the bank was expected to carry on operating as normal. According to the government, the bank "would have ceased to exist" within a few weeks if there had not been intervention. It later turned out that Glitnir had US$750 million of debt due to mature on 15 October. However, the nationalization of Glitnir never went through, as it was placed in receivership by the FME before the initial plan of the Icelandic government to purchase a 75% stake had been approved by shareholders.

The announced nationalisation of Glitnir came just as the United Kingdom government was forced to nationalise Bradford & Bingley and to sell its retail operations and branch network to Grupo Santander . Over the weekend of 4–5 October, British newspapers carried many articles detailing the nationalisation of Glitnir and the high leverage of Iceland's other banks. Influential BBC business editor Robert Peston published an opinion piece on the banks, stating that debt insurance for Kaupthing required a premium of £625,000 to guarantee the return of £1 million: "the worst case of financial BO I've encountered in some time" was his graphic description. The Guardian said "Iceland is on the brink of collapse. Inflation and interest rates are raging upwards. The krona, Iceland's currency, is in freefall." These articles spooked investors discussing Icesave (the brand name of Landsbanki in the UK and the Netherlands) in online forums and many started moving their savings out of the Internet bank. Problems with access to the site hinted at a run on savings.

On 6 October, a number of private interbank credit facilities to Icelandic banks were shut down. Prime Minister Geir Haarde addressed the nation in a speech that became infamous for its portentous closing words: ' God bless Iceland '. He announced a package of new regulatory measures which were to be put to the Althing , Iceland's parliament, immediately, with the cooperation of the opposition parties. These included the power of the FME to take over the running of Icelandic banks without nationalising them, and preferential treatment for depositors in the event that a bank had to be liquidated . In a separate measure, retail deposits in Icelandic branches of Icelandic banks were guaranteed in full. The emergency measures had been deemed unnecessary by the Icelandic government less than 24 hours earlier.

That evening, the Guernsey subsidiary of Landsbanki went into voluntary administration with the approval of the Guernsey Financial Services Commission . The administrators would later say that "The main reason for the Bank's difficulties has been the placing of funds with its UK fellow subsidiary, Heritable Bank ." Guernsey's Chief Minister stated "the directors of Landsbanki Guernsey took appropriate steps by putting the bank into administration."

The FME placed Landsbanki in receivership early on 7 October. A press release from the FME stated that all of Landsbanki's domestic branches, call centres, ATMs and internet operations will be open for business as usual, and that all "domestic deposits" were fully guaranteed. The UK government used the Banking (Special Provisions) Act 2008 first to transfer retail deposits from Heritable Bank to a Treasury holding company, then to sell them to Dutch bank ING Direct for £1 million. The same day, the FME also placed Glitnir into receivership.

That afternoon, there was a telephone conversation between Icelandic Finance Minister Árni Mathiesen and UK Chancellor of the Exchequer Alistair Darling . That evening, one of the governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, Davíð Oddsson , was interviewed on Icelandic public service broadcaster RÚV and stated that "we [the Icelandic State] do not intend to pay the debts of the banks that have been a little heedless". He compared the government's measures to the U.S. intervention at Washington Mutual , and suggested that foreign creditors would "unfortunately only get 5–10–15% of their claims".

Darling announced that he was taking steps to freeze the assets of Landsbanki in the UK. The Landsbanki Freezing Order 2008 was passed at 10 am on 8 October 2008 and came into force ten minutes later. Under the order the UK Treasury froze the assets of Landsbanki within the UK, and introduced provisions to prevent the sale or movement of Landsbanki assets within the UK, even if held by the Central Bank of Iceland or the Government of Iceland. The freezing order took advantage of provisions in sections 4 and 14 and Schedule 3 of the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 , and was made "because the Treasury believed that action to the detriment of the UK's economy (or part of it) had been or was likely to be taken by certain persons who are the government of or resident of a country or territory outside the UK".

The UK Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, announced that the UK government would launch legal action against Iceland over concerns with compensation for the estimated 300,000 UK savers. Geir Haarde said at a press conference on the following day that the Icelandic government was outraged that the UK government applied provisions of anti-terrorism legislation to it in a move they dubbed an "unfriendly act". The Chancellor of the Exchequer also said that the UK government would foot the entire bill to compensate UK retail depositors, estimated at £4 billion. It is reported that more than £4 billion in Icelandic assets in the UK have been frozen by the UK government. The UK Financial Services Authority (FSA) also declared Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander , the UK subsidiary of Kaupthing Bank , in default on its obligations, sold Kaupthing Edge , its Internet bank, to ING Direct, and put Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander into administration. Over £2.5 billion of deposits for 160,000 customers were sold to ING Direct. The scale of the run on Kaupthing Edge deposits had been such that many transactions were not completed until 17 October. [ citation needed ] Although Geir Haarde has described the UK government's actions over Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander as an "abuse of power" and "unprecedented", they were the third such actions taken under the Banking (Special Provisions) Act 2008 in less than ten days, after interventions in Bradford & Bingley and Heritable Bank.

On the same day, the Sveriges Riksbank , Sweden's central bank, made a credit facility of 5 billion Swedish krona (€520 million) available to Kaupthing Bank Sverige AB, the Swedish subsidiary of Kaupthing. The loan was to pay "depositors and other creditors".

On 9 October, Kaupthing was placed into receivership by the FME, following the resignation of the entire board of directors. The bank said that it was in technical default on its loan agreements after its UK subsidiary had been placed into administration. Kaupthing's Luxembourg subsidiary asked for, and obtained, a suspension of payments (similar to chapter 11 protection ) in the Luxembourg District Court. Kaupthing's Geneva office, which was a branch of its Luxembourg subsidiary, was prevented from making any payments of more than 5000 Swiss francs by the Swiss Federal Banking Commission . The directors of Kaupthing's subsidiary on the Isle of Man decided to wind up the company after consultation with the Manx authorities. The Finnish Financial Supervision Authority, Rahoitustarkastus , announced having taken control of Kaupthing's Helsinki branch already on 6th, to prevent money from being sent back to Iceland.

On the same day, the UK Treasury issued a licence under the Landsbanki Freezing Order 2008 to allow the London branch of Landsbanki to continue some business. A second licence was issued on 13 October, when the Bank of England provided a £100 million secured loan to Landsbanki "to help maximise the returns to UK creditors".

On 12 October the Norwegian government took control of Kaupthing's Norwegian operations, including "all of the bank's assets and liabilities in Norway".

On 21 October, the Central Bank of Iceland asked the remaining independent financial institutions for new collateral against their loans. This was to replace the shares in Glitnir, Landsbanki and Kaupthing which had been pledged as collateral previously and which were now of much lower value, if not worthless. The value of the collateral was estimated at 300 billion krónur (€2 billion). One of the banks, Sparisjóðabanki (SPB, also known as Icebank), stated the next day that it could not provide new collateral for its 68 billion krónur (€451 million) loan, and would have to turn to the government for help. "This problem won't be solved in any other way," said CEO Agnar Hansson.

On 24 October, it emerged that a Norwegian export credit company ( Eksportfinansiering [ no ] ) had made a complaint to Norwegian police concerning the alleged embezzlement of 415 million Norwegian kroner (€47 million) by Glitnir since 2006. The Icelandic bank had acted as an agent for Eksportfinans, administering loans to several companies: however Eksportfinans alleges that, when the loans were paid off early by borrowers, Glitnir kept the cash and merely continued with the regular payments to Eksportfinans, effectively taking an unauthorized loan itself.

Trading in shares of six financial companies on the OMX Nordic Iceland Exchange was suspended on 6 October by order of the FME. On Thursday 9 October, all trading on the exchange was frozen for two days by the government "in an attempt to prevent further panic spreading throughout the country's financial markets". The decision was made to do so due to "unusual market conditions", with share prices having fallen 30% since the start of the month. The closure was extended through Monday 13 October due to continuing "unusual market conditions".

The market reopened on 14 October with the main index, the OMX Iceland 15 , at 678.4, which corresponds to a plunge of about 77% compared with 3,004.6 before the closure. This reflects the fact that the value of the three big banks, which form 73.2% of the value of the OMX Iceland 15, had been set to zero. The values of other equities varied from +8% to −15%. Trading in shares of Exista , SPRON and Straumur-Burðarás (13.66% of the OMX Iceland 15) remains suspended. After a week of very thin trading, the OMX Iceland 15 closed on 17 October at 643.1, down 93% in króna terms and 96% in euro terms from its historic high of 9016 (18 July 2007).

Trading in the shares of two financial services companies, Straumur–Burðarás and Exista, resumed on 9 December: together the companies account for 12.04% of the OMX Iceland 15. The values of the shares in both companies dropped sharply, and the index closed at 394.88, down by 40.17% on the day. Trading in shares in SPRON and Kaupthing remains suspended, at prices of 1.90 krónur and 694.00 krónur respectively.

The four credit rating agencies which monitor Iceland's sovereign debt all lowered their ratings during the crisis, and their outlook for future ratings changes became negative. The Icelandic government had a relatively healthy balance, with sovereign debt of 28% of GDP and a budget surplus of 6% of GDP (2007). More recently, the estimated 2011 debt was 130% of GDP with a budget deficit of 6% of GDP.

In addition, the value of foreign currency bonds which matured in the remainder of 2008 was only $600 million, and foreign currency debt service in 2009 was only $215 million, well within the government's ability to pay. However the agencies believed that the government would have to issue more foreign currency bonds, both to cover losses as the banks' overseas operations are liquidation and also to stimulate demand in the domestic economy as Iceland goes into recession.

A team of experts from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) arrived in Iceland at the start of October 2008 for talks with the government. Industry Minister Össur Skarphéðinsson was said to be "favourable" to help from the IMF to stabilise the króna and to allow interest rates to be lowered.

On 7 October, the central bank of Iceland announced that they had been in talks with the Russian ambassador to Iceland, Victor I. Tatarintsev , over a €4 billion loan from Russia. The loan would be given across three or four years, with an interest rate of 30 to 50 basis points (0.3% to 0.5%) above LIBOR . Central Bank of Iceland governor Davíð Oddsson later clarified that the loan was still being negotiated. According to RÚV, prime minister Geir Haarde had been investigating the possibility of a Russian loan since the mid-summer. When questioned on the matter in a press conference, Geir Haarde said: "We have not received the kind of support that we were requesting from our friends. So in a situation like that one has to look for new friends."

A team of Icelandic negotiators arrived in Moscow on 14 October to discuss the possible loan. Russian deputy finance minister Dmitri Pankin said that "The meeting took place in a friendly atmosphere.... We are working thoroughly on the issue to take a final decision". On the same day, the Central Bank of Iceland drew on its swap facilities with the central banks of Denmark and Norway for €200 million each. Iceland has swap facilities with the other Nordic countries for a total of €1.5 billion. Iceland also sought assistance from the European Central Bank (ECB); there was some precedent for the move at the time, as the ECB already had currency swap arrangements with Switzerland, another non-member of the European Union .

On 24 October, the IMF tentatively agreed to lend €1.58 billion. However the loan had still not been approved by the executive board of the IMF on 13 November. Due to the delay Iceland found itself caught in a classic catch-22 situation, loans from other countries could not be secured until the IMF program had been approved. The Icelandic government spoke of a $500M (€376M) gap in the funding plans. Dutch finance minister Wouter Bos stated that the Netherlands would oppose the loan unless agreement was reached over deposit insurance for Landsbanki customers in the Netherlands.

The IMF-led package of $4.6bn was finally agreed on 19 November, with the IMF loaning $2.1bn and another $2.5bn of loans and currency swaps from Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark. In addition, Poland  offered to lend $200M and the Faroe Islands also offered $50M, about 3% of the Faroese GDP. The Icelandic government reported that Russia offered to lend $500M, and Poland, $200M. The next day, Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom announced a joint loan of $6.3bn (€5bn), related to the deposit insurance dispute.

In 2001, banks were deregulated in Iceland. This set the stage for banks to upload debts when foreign companies were accumulated. The crisis unfolded when these banks became unable to refinance their debts. It is estimated that the three major banks held foreign debt in excess of €50 billion, or about €160,000 per Icelandic resident, compared with Iceland's gross domestic product of €8.5 billion. As early as March 2008, the cost of private deposit insurance for deposits in Landsbanki and Kaupthing was already far higher (6– 8 + 1 ⁄ 2 % of the sum deposited) than for other European banks. [ citation needed ] The króna, which was ranked by The Economist in early 2007 as the most overvalued currency in the world (based on the Big Mac Index ), has further suffered from the effects of carry trading .

Coming from a small domestic market, Iceland's banks have financed their expansion with loans on the interbank lending market and, more recently, by deposits from outside Iceland (which are also a form of external debt). Households also took on a large amount of debt, equivalent to 213% of disposable income , which led to inflation. This inflation was exacerbated by the practice of the Central Bank of Iceland issuing liquidity loans to banks on the basis of newly issued, uncovered bonds – effectively, printing money on demand.

In response to the rise in prices – 14% in the twelve months to September 2008, compared with a target of 2.5% – the Central Bank of Iceland held interest rates high (15.5%). Such high interest rates, compared with 5.5% in the United Kingdom or 4% in the eurozone for example, encouraged overseas investors to hold deposits in Icelandic krónur, leading to monetary inflation : the Icelandic money supply (M3) grew 56.5% in the twelve months to September 2008, compared with 5.0% GDP growth. The situation was effectively an economic bubble , with investors overestimating the true value of the króna.

As with many banks around the world, the Icelandic banks found it increasingly difficult or impossible to roll over their loans in the interbank market , their creditors insisting on payment while no other banks were willing to make fresh loans. In such a situation, a bank would normally have to ask for a loan from the central bank as the lender of last resort . However, in Iceland the banks were so much larger than the national economy that the Central Bank of Iceland and the Icelandic government could not guarantee the payment of the banks' debts, leading to the collapse of the banks. The official reserves of the Central Bank of Iceland stood at 374.8 billion krónur at the end of September 2008, compared with 350.3 billion krónur of short-term international debt in the Icelandic banking sector, and at least £6.5 billion (1,250 billion krónur) of retail deposits in the UK.

The situation was made worse by the fact that Icesave was operating as a branch of Landsbanki, rather than as a legally independent subsidiary. As such, it was completely dependent on the Central Bank of Iceland for emergency loans of liquidity , and could not turn to the Bank of England for help. The UK Financial Services Authority (FSA) was aware of the risk, and was considering imposing special liquidity requirements on Icelandic deposit-taking banks in the weeks before the crisis. However the plan – which was never implemented – would have forced the Icelandic banks to cut interest rates or stop taking new deposits, and might even have sparked the sort of bank run it was designed to prevent. The Guernsey authorities were also planning on bringing in restrictions on foreign banks operating as branches and on transfers of funds between Guernsey subsidiaries and parent banks ("parental upstreaming"). Landsbanki operated in Guernsey through a legally independent subsidiary.

The existence of a bank run on Landsbanki accounts in the UK in the period up to 7 October seems confirmed by a statement from the bank on 10 October, which said "Landsbanki Íslands hf. transferred substantial funds to its UK branch during this time to fulfil its Icesave commitments." The transfer of funds from Landsbanki Guernsey to Heritable Bank , a Landsbanki subsidiary in the UK, also suggests a bank run in the UK. A transfer of "substantial funds" from Iceland to the UK would have been a significant downward push on the value of the króna, even before the effects of any speculation.

Wholesale funding disappeared in September 2008 leading to the collapse of Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki. Due to the size of the combined balance sheet of the three banks, the government of Iceland did not have the means to save them. They were put into receivership instead with their boards replaced. Nevertheless, the failed banks were restructured by dividing them into a new and an old bank in order to avoid a credit crunch .

The new state-owned banks took over the domestic activities and have been recapitalised by government with a capital ratio of 16% of all assets. The Financial Supervisory Authority (FME) has acted to "ring-fence" the Icelandic operations of Landsbanki and Glitnir, stating its aim of "continued banking operations for Icelandic families and businesses". NBI (originally known as Nýi Landsbanki ) was set up on 9 October with 200 billion krónur in equity and 2,300 billion krónur of assets. Nýi Glitnir was set up on 15 October with 110 billion krónur in equity and 1,200 billion krónur of assets. Nýja Kaupþing was set up on 22 October with 75 billion krónur in equity and 700 billion krónur of assets. The equity in all three new banks was supplied by the Icelandic government, and amounted to 30% of Iceland's GDP. The new banks will also have to reimburse their predecessors for the net value of the transferred assets, as determined by "recognised appraisers". As of 14 November 2008, these net values were estimated as: NBI ISK558.1bn (€3.87bn), Nýi Glitnir ISK442.4bn (€2.95bn); Nýja Kaupþing ISK172.3bn (€1.14bn). The total debt of 1173 billion krónur is more than 90% of Iceland's 2007 gross domestic product.

The international businesses remained with the old banks for winding up. Glitnir and Kaupthing, shorn of their Icelandic operations, obtained moratoria on payments to creditors (similar to USA Chapter 11 protection) from the District Court of Reykjavík on 24 November.

The rescue operations of the central bank along with the restructuring and recapitalization of the banks increased the public debt ratio by about 20 percentage points of GDP.

The 2008 economic climate in the country affected many Icelandic businesses and citizens. A new bank was created to replace the insolvent Landsbanki , Landsbankinn (formerly Nýi Landsbanki), causing around 271 employees to lose their jobs due to the restructuring of the organisation, intended to minimise the bank's international operations. Similar job losses occurred at Giltnir and Kaputhing. The job losses can be compared with the 2,136 registered unemployed and 495 advertised vacancies in Iceland at the end of August 2008.

Other companies were also affected. For example, the private Sterling Airlines declared bankruptcy on 29 October 2008. The national airline Icelandair has noticed a significant slump in domestic demand for flights, although it later recovered. Guðjón Arngrímsson, a spokesman for the airline, said "we're getting decent traffic from other markets... we are trying to let the weak króna help us." He has also stated that it is impossible to predict whether the company will be profitable this year. Morgunblaðið , an Icelandic newspaper, cut some [ quantify ] jobs and merging parts of its operations with the media corporation 365 . The newspaper 24 stundir ceased publication due to the crisis, resulting in the loss of 20 jobs.

Importers were particularly hard hit, with the government restricting foreign currency to essential products such as food, medicines and oil. The €400 million loan from the central banks of Denmark and Norway is sufficient to pay for a month's imports, although on 15 October there was still a "temporary delay" which affected "all payments to and from the country".

The assets of Icelandic pension funds were, according to one expert, expected to shrink by 15–25%. The Icelandic Pension Funds Association announced that benefits would be cut in 2009. Iceland's GDP shrank by 10% as a result of the crisis, putting Iceland by some measures in an economic depression. Inflation climbed as 75% by the end of the year.

Unemployment had more than tripled by late November 2008, with over 7000 registered jobseekers (about 4% of the workforce) compared to just 2136 at the end of August 2008. As 80% of household debt is indexed and another 13% denominated in foreign currencies, debt payment is going to be more costly. Since October 2008, 14% of the workforce have experienced reductions in pay, and around 7% have had their working hours reduced. According to the president of the Icelandic Federation of Labour (ASÍ), Gylfi Arnbjörnsson, these figures are lower than expected. 85% of those registered as unemployed in Iceland stated that they lost their job in October, after the economic collapse.

On 17 July 2009, lawmakers voted 33–28 (with two abstentions) to approve a government plan for Iceland to apply for full European Union membership. Although Iceland (as a member of EFTA ) already had a free trade arrangement with the EU, it had always rejected full membership due to concerns that its independence could be compromised. [ citation needed ] However, Prime Minister Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir , who was elected in April, had promised to bring Iceland into the EU to help stabilize its economy. EU enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn expressed support for Iceland's membership, stating that as "a country with deep democratic traditions", Iceland will be welcome in the EU's expansion plans. (However, on 13 September 2013 the Government of Iceland dissolved its accession team and suspended its application to join the EU. On 12 March 2015, Foreign Minister of Iceland Gunnar Bragi Sveinsson stated that he had sent a letter to the EU withdrawing the application for membership, without the approval of the Althing , though the European Union stated that Iceland had not formally withdrawn the application. )

The crisis led to a radical shift in the political landscape of Iceland which until this time had been marked by stability. After the effects of the crisis set in, mainstream parties were discredited as newer parties such as the Left Greens and the Pirate Party moved into the mainstream. During the Social Democrat-Left Green coalition (2009-13) the crisis was blamed on corruption and a lack of transparency; in reaction to this the government attempted to reform the constitution and protect the welfare state. Joining the coalition resulted in the Left Greens losing their innocence as a party, resulting in voters punishing them at the 2013 election , at which they lost about half of their voter base. Voters were angry that the government had seemingly bowed to the IMF demands and introduced austerity. Later on in 2016 and 2017 the Left Greens were able to gain back a sizable proportation of their electoral gains by focusing their campaigns on their historical opposition to the Independence Party and oil drilling off the coast as well as arguing that the largest state run bank should be converted into a value based bank .

Over £840 million in cash from more than 100 UK local authorities was invested in Icelandic banks. Representatives from each council met to try to persuade the Treasury to secure the money in the same way that customers' money in Icesave was fully guaranteed. Of all the local authorities, Kent County Council has the most money invested in Icelandic banks, £50 million. Transport for London , the organisation that operates and coordinates transport services within London, also has a large investment at £40 million. Local authorities were working under government advice to invest their money across many national and international banks as a way of spreading risk. Other UK organisations said to have invested heavily include police services and fire authorities, and even the Audit Commission . In October 2008, it was hoped that about one-third of the deposited money will be available fairly rapidly, corresponding to the liquid assets of the UK subsidiaries: liquidation of other assets, such as loans and offices, will take longer.

In an emergency sitting of Tynwald on 9 October 2008, the Isle of Man government raised compensation from 75% of the first £15,000 per depositor to 100% of £50,000 per depositor. The Chief Minister of the Isle of Man , Tony Brown , confirmed that Kaupthing had guaranteed the operations and liabilities of its Manx subsidiary in September 2007, and that the Manx government was pressing Iceland to honour this guarantee. Depositors with Landsbanki on Guernsey found themselves without any depositor protection.

In October 2008, an agreement was reached between the Icelandic and Dutch governments on the savings of about 120,000 Dutch citizens. The Icelandic government agreed to cover the first €20,887 on savings accounts of Dutch citizens held by Landsbanki subsidiary Icesave, using money lent by the Dutch government. The total value of Icesave deposits in the Netherlands were €1.7 billion. At the same time, Iceland and Britain reached an agreement on the general contours of a solution: Icesave deposits in the UK total £4 billion (€5 billion) in 300,000 accounts. The figure of €20,887 was the amount covered by the Icelandic Depositors' and Investors' Guarantee Fund (DIGF; Tryggingarsjóður in Icelandic ): however, the DIGF had equity of only 8.3 billion krónur at the end of 2007, €90 million at the exchange rates of the time and far from sufficient to cover the Dutch and British claims.

The cost of deposit insurance in the UK was unclear in November 2008. The Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) paid around £3 billion to transfer deposits from Heritable Bank and Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander to ING Direct, while the UK Treasury paid an additional £600 million to guarantee retail deposits that were higher than the FSCS limit. The Treasury also paid out £800 million to guarantee Icesave deposits that were higher than the limit. A loan of £2.2 billion to the Icelandic government was expected to cover the claims against the Icelandic DIGF relating to Icesave, while the exposure of the UK FSCS is expected to be £1-2 billion. The Supreme Court of Iceland , in 2011, ordered the repayment of "£4.5bn to the UK and €1.6bn (£1.2bn) by liquidating assets". In January 2016, The Financial Times reported that HM Treasury "had been paid £740m from the Landsbanki estate". This payment by the Landsbanki estate was the final repayment to the UK's treasury, which totaled £4.6bn.

The crisis also prompted the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to reduce its foreign aid to developing nations, from 0.31% to 0.27% of GNP. The effect of the aid cut was greatly amplified by the falling value of the króna: the budget of the Icelandic International Development Agency (ICEIDA) was reduced from US$22 million to $13 million. Since Iceland's foreign aid is targeted in sectors for which the country has particular expertise (e.g., fisheries, geothermal power), the cutbacks will have a substantial impact in countries which receive Icelandic aid – most noticeably in Sri Lanka, where ICEIDA is pulling out altogether.

On 27 February 2009, The Wall Street Journal reported that Iceland's new government was trying to raise $25 million by selling its ambassadorial residences in Washington, New York, London and Oslo.

On 28 August 2009, Iceland's parliament voted 34–15 (with 14 abstentions) to approve a bill (commonly referred to as the Icesave bill ) to pay the United Kingdom and the Netherlands more than $5 billion lost in Icelandic deposit accounts. Initially opposed in June, the bill was passed after amendments were added which set a ceiling on the payment based on the country's gross domestic product. Opponents of the bill argued that Icelanders, already reeling from the crisis, should not have to pay for mistakes made by private banks under the watch of other governments. However, the government argued that if the bill failed to pass, the UK and the Netherlands might retaliate by blocking a planned aid package for Iceland from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Under the deal, up to 4% of Iceland's gross domestic product (GDP) will be paid to the UK, in sterling terms, from 2017 to 2023 while the Netherlands will receive up to 2% of Iceland's GDP, in euro terms, for the same period. Talks between Icelandic, Dutch and UK ministers in January 2010 dubbed as " Icesave " did not result in any specific actions being agreed upon.

On 12 December 2008, the Althing established a Special Investigation Commission (SIC), which came to consist of Supreme Court Justice Páll Hreinsson who served as chairman, Parliamentary Ombudsman Tryggvi Gunnarsson and Sigríður Benediktsdóttir associate chair at Yale University , to investigate the causes and lessons of the crisis. The commission released its report on 12 April 2010.

The Office of the Special Prosecutor was founded with the passage of a bill in the Icelandic parliament 10 December 2008. The aim was to investigate suspected criminal conduct leading up to, in connection with or in the wake of the banking crisis, whether these relate to the activities of financial undertakings, other legal entities or individuals, and, as appropriate, to follow up these investigations by bringing charges in court against those concerned.

In February 2009, Ólafur Hauksson (b. Reykjavík 1964) was appointed; it was the Icelandic government's second attempt to appoint to the role, and Ólafur was one of only two applicants. He had previously been the police chief in Akranes . At the time the unit had four staff members; by September 2013 it had 109, with 140 cases under investigation. By that time, the top managers of all three Icelandic banks which collapsed during the financial crisis had been charged, though the cases progressed slowly. The last active investigation related to the financial crisis concluded in December 2017; 202 cases had been investigated in total over the period, with 23 of them ending up in court. By January 2018, 13 of the court cases ended with guilty verdicts, four with not guilty verdicts and six trials were still pending.

The investigation has been focusing on a number of questionable financial practices engaged in by Icelandic banks:

On 9 March 2011, Robert and Vincent Tchenguiz were arrested in London by the UK's Serious Fraud Office as part of their ongoing investigation in conjunction with Iceland's Special Prosecutor's Office into the collapse of Icelandic Bank Kaupthing. Neither was, however, indicted, and in fact they sued the Serious Fraud Office for wrongful arrest, receiving large sums in compensation.

Since the crisis began, many of Iceland's business leaders, who had previously been considered financial gurus who greatly developed Iceland's economy, are now under intense public scrutiny for their roles in causing the financial crisis:

Reportedly, all of those under scrutiny are now rarely seen in public and some have apparently left the country. They are also reportedly the subjects of an ongoing investigation to determine if any of their business practices warrant criminal prosecution.

Former Prime Minister Davíð Oddsson has claimed that Iceland needs to investigate "unusual and unconventional loans" given by the banks to senior politicians during the years before the crisis.

Björn Bjarnson , the former Minister for Justice and Ecclesiastical Affairs, has started a blog detailing the problems with the business sector and the efforts to cover them up. This was cited as an example of how politicians and businessmen, who traditionally held a tight grip over the Icelandic media, have lost this control and that dozens of similar blogs have been created. Björn stated that:

"I have written a lot about problems in the business sector over the last 14 years, and I can only compare some parts of it to Enron . Here companies have been playing a game, using the media and publishing to make themselves look good. We only hope that the foreign media will soon begin to understand what has been going on".

Parts of the Icelandic public have arranged protests against the Central Bank, the Parliament and the government's alleged lack of responsibility before and after the crisis, attracting between 3000 and 6000 people (1–2% of Iceland's population) on Saturdays.

In early November 2008, the President of Iceland , Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson , at an informal lunch with foreign diplomats, criticized Iceland's traditional friends (particularly Britain, Sweden and Denmark) as well as the International Monetary Fund. According to a memo from the Norwegian embassy, he suggested that the Russians might want to use the Keflavík Air Base , the Russian ambassador replied that they had no need for it. The President is quoted to have said that Iceland would soon recover, even if they had to fight alone. The President does not necessarily agree with the government on these issues.

In October 2008, the UK PM Gordon Brown used provisions in part 2 of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 to freeze Landsbanki holdings in the United Kingdom. Iceland's prime minister Geir Haarde protested against what he described as "a terrorist law being applied against us", calling it "a completely unfriendly act". Angered by the British decision, Iceland decided to submit a formal complaint to NATO about their move, and it also provoked more than 80,000 Icelanders (equal to 25% of its entire population) to sign an online petition set up under the heading "Icelanders are not terrorists". The relationship got even tenser when UK replied a month later by cancelling its scheduled patrol of the Icelandic airspace in December 2008. Iceland has no standing army of its own, and relies on a long-term standing agreement with NATO where a group of member states have committed in turns to defend the Icelandic airspace, and the UK Royal Air Force had now cancelled this after mutual agreement with NATO.

According to a poll from late November 2008, 64% were in favour of early elections, with only 29.3% opposed. In a poll from 22 November 2008, the Social Democratic Alliance led with 33.6%, followed by the Left-Green Alliance at 27.8% and the Independence Party at 24.8%; the Progressive Party and the Liberal Party were far behind, with only 6.3% and 4.3%, respectively.

As the Parliament met again on 20 January 2009, there were protests with reinvigorated force and escalation of conflict between protesters and the police. On 22 January, police used tear gas to disperse people on Austurvöllur (the square in front of the Alþing), the first such use since the 1949 anti-NATO protest .

Prime Minister Geir H. Haarde announced on 23 January 2009 that he would be stepping down as leader of the Independence Party for health reasons: he had been diagnosed as having a malignant oesophageal tumour . He said he would travel to the Netherlands around the end of January for treatment. Education Minister and Independence Party vice-chairman Þorgerður Katrín Gunnarsdóttir was to serve as Prime Minister in his absence. The leader of the Social Democratic Alliance , Foreign Minister Ingibjörg Sólrún Gísladóttir , was also unwell, undergoing treatment for a benign brain tumour since September 2008. The government recommended that elections be held on 9 May 2009.

Björgvin G. Sigurðsson , Iceland's Commerce Minister , resigned on 25 January, citing the pressures of the nation's economic collapse, as the country's political leaders failed to agree on how to lead country out of its financial crisis. One of his last acts as minister was to dismiss the director of the Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA). Björgvin acknowledged that Icelanders have lost faith in their government and political system. "I want to shoulder my part of the responsibility for that," he said.

Negotiations on continuing the coalition broke down the next day, apparently over demands from the Social Democratic Alliance to take over the leadership of the government, and Geir Haarde tendered the government's resignation to the President of Iceland, Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson. The President asked the present government to continue until a new government can be formed, and held talks with the five political parties represented in the Althing.

After these discussions, Ingibjörg Sólrún Gísladóttir of the Social Democratic Alliance and Steingrímur J. Sigfússon of the Left-Green Movement were asked by the President to negotiate the formation of a new coalition government. Such a coalition would be five seats short of an overall majority in the Althing, but the Progressive Party (seven seats) was expected to support the coalition without actually joining the government. Neither party leader became Prime Minister: instead, the position went to Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir of the Social Democratic Alliance, then the Minister of Social Affairs and Social Security , who became the new chairwoman of her party on 28 March 2009.

On 8 April 2009, former Prime Minister Geir H. Haarde stated that he was solely responsible for accepting controversial donations to the Icelandic Independence Party in 2006, ISK 30 million from the investment group FL Group , and ISK 25 million from Landsbanki.

Geir was strongly criticized in the April 2010 report of the Special Investigative Commission into the financial collapse, being accused of "negligence" along with three other ministers of his government. Iceland's parliament voted 33–30 to indict Geir, but not the other ministers, on charges of negligence in office at a session on 28 September 2010. He stood trial before the Landsdómur , a special court to hear cases alleging misconduct in government office: it was the first time the Landsdómur had convened since it was established in the 1905 Constitution . The trial began in Reykjavik on 5 March 2012. Geir Haarde was found guilty on one of four charges on 23 April 2012, for not holding cabinet meetings on important state matters. Landsdómur said Mr. Haarde would face no punishment, as this was a minor offence.

Iceland's financial position has steadily improved since the crash. The economic contraction and rise in unemployment appear to have been arrested by late 2010 and with growth under way in mid-2011. Four main factors have been important in this regard. First is the emergency legislation passed by the Icelandic parliament in October 2008. It served to minimise the impact of the 2008 financial crisis on the country. The Financial Supervisory Authority of Iceland used permission granted by the emergency legislation to take over the domestic operations of the three largest banks. The much larger foreign operations of the banks, however, went into receivership.

A second important factor is the success of the IMF Stand-By-Arrangement in the country since November 2008. The SBA includes three pillars. The first pillar is a program of medium term fiscal consolidation, involving painful austerity measures and significant tax hikes. The result has been that central government debts have been stabilised at around 80–90 percent of GDP. A second pillar is the resurrection of a viable but sharply downsized domestic banking system on the ruins of its gargantuan international banking system which the government was unable to bail out. A third pillar is the enactment of capital controls and the work to gradually lift these to restore normal financial linkages with the outside world. An important result of the emergency legislation and the SBA is that the country has not been seriously affected by the Euro area crisis . Despite a contentious debate with Britain and the Netherlands over the question of a state guarantee on the Icesave deposits of Landsbanki in these countries, credit default swaps on Icelandic sovereign debt have steadily declined from over 1000 points prior to the crash in 2008 to around 200 points in June 2011. The fact that the assets of the failed Landsbanki branches were estimated to cover most of the depositor claims had an influence to ease concerns over the situation.

The third major factor behind the resolution of the financial crisis was the decision by the government of Iceland to apply for membership in the EU in July 2009. While views on the feasibility of EU membership are quite mixed in Iceland, this action has served to enhance the credibility of the country on international financial markets. One sign of the success of the above efforts is the fact that the Icelandic government was successfully able to raise $1 billion with a bond issue on 9 June 2011. This development indicates that international investors have given the government and the new banking system, with two of the three biggest banks now in foreign hands, a clean bill of health. The first two major measures were implemented by the government of Geir H. Haarde but also carried out by the government of Johanna Sigurdardottir, which then took the step to apply for EU membership.

Finally, the fourth major factor was the sharp rise in foreign tourism, which pumped a large amount of money into the economy; this tourism boom was caused primarily by the 2010 eruptions of Eyjafjallajökull and the rise in popularity of Game of Thrones , which had some scenes that were filmed in Iceland.

Iceland has undertaken recapitalization of lenders such as injection of ISK 33 billion (2.1% of 2010 GDP) into Housing Financing Fund at the end of 2010, under a restructuring plan approved by the EFTSA .

By mid-2012 Iceland was regarded as one of Europe's recovery success stories. It has had two years of economic growth. Unemployment was down to 6.3% and Iceland was attracting immigrants to fill jobs. Currency devaluation effectively reduced wages by 50% making exports more competitive and imports more expensive. Ten-year government bonds were issued below 6%, lower than some of the PIIGS nations in the EU (Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain). Tryggvi Thor Herbertsson, a member of parliament, noted that adjustments via currency devaluations are less painful than government labor policies and negotiations. Nevertheless, while EU fervor has cooled the government continued to pursue membership.

Iceland elected a new government in April 2013, which as one of their top priorities wanted to negotiate a debt haircut towards foreign creditors of the three failed Icelandic banks now in receivership, as part of a deal to lift the long enforced (since November 2008) capital controls . The 2013 controls ban a swap/exchange of ISK denominated assets to foreign currency, and so by effect has trapped repayment of ISK denominated assets to the creditors – which in theory mean they should be interested to accept a haircut in return for getting the capital controls lifted. The Icelandic government intent somehow to route the saved money from the negotiated debt haircut for creditors into a national household debt relief fund, enabling a 20% debt relief for all household mortgages. In July 2013, Standard & Poors recommended Iceland to drop the debt relief initiative, as it would only result in increased debt for the government – making it even more difficult to lend at credit markets, and it was forecasted also to ignite high inflation along with an economic recession equal to a GDP detraction of 10%. The government has nevertheless appointed a taskforce to present proposals on how best to achieve the government's goal about implementing a combined capital control abolition and debt relief for households, with a reporting deadline in October 2013. Capital controls were eventually ended in March 2017.

A significant amount of the capital trapped in Iceland by the capital controls was channelled into property investment, partly by the financial management company Gamma, and was one factor that fuelled rising property prices in Iceland after the crash.

The Icelandic Prime Minister commissioned Frosti Sigurjónsson to study Iceland's monetary system. In the 2015 report, Sigurjónsson argued the central bank was unable to contain the credit boom and proposed sovereign money reform .

The Eurovision Song Contest 2013 was the 58th edition of the Eurovision Song Contest . It consisted of two semi-finals on 14 and 16 May and a final on 18 May 2013, held at the Malmö Arena in Malmö , Sweden, and presented by Petra Mede . It was organised by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) and host broadcaster Sveriges Television (SVT), which staged the event after winning the 2012 contest for Sweden with the song " Euphoria " by Loreen . It was the first time that only one host had presented the show since the 1995 contest . Eric Saade , who had previously represented Sweden in 2011 , acted as the green room host in the final.

Broadcasters from thirty-nine countries participated in the contest, with Armenia returning after a one-year absence. Bosnia and Herzegovina , Portugal , Slovakia , and Turkey all ceased their participation for various reasons. Slovakia and Turkey have yet to return to the contest since.

The winner was the song " Only Teardrops ", written by Lise Cabble , Julia Fabrin Jakobsen, and Thomas Stengaard, and performed by Emmelie de Forest representing Denmark . The song had the highest average score in both the televote and jury vote. Azerbaijan , Ukraine , Norway , and Russia rounded out the top five.

This year marked the reintroduction of the "Parade of Nations", a concept which was first used in the contest from 1959 to 1963 (with the exception of 1962 ) before making a one-off return in 1983 . The concept had also been used, on-and-off, in the Junior Eurovision Song Contest since 2004 . It sees all competing artist performing in the final presenting themselves with their national flags before the contest begins. This year, they entered the main stage by walking across a bridge over the audience. This idea has subsequently continued in every edition of the contest onwards.

The EBU reported that 170 million viewers watched the semi-finals and final of the 2013 edition.

On 8 July 2012, the Swedish broadcaster Sveriges Television (SVT) announced that the Malmö Arena in Malmö would be the host venue for the 2013 contest. This was the fifth time after 1975 , 1985 , 1992 and 2000 that the competition was held in Sweden, and the second time that it was held in Malmö, after 1992. SVT had expressed the desire to host the contest at a slightly smaller venue than previous years, as well as smaller environment which is easier to dedicate and decorate for other celebrations and festivities of the event within the host city. These were factors in the choice of the Malmö Arena as the host venue, and Malmö as Sweden's third-largest city by population after Stockholm and Gothenburg , the two other initial location-bidders.

The city's proximity to the borders with Denmark and Norway also spilled over into some of the producers' actions. Denmark was eventually allocated to compete in one semi-final and Norway in the other, taking into consideration the number of Danish and Norwegian fans who were likely to travel for the contest, with the arena being relatively small and thus not suitable for accommodating both countries' fans in one semi-final. The Øresund Bridge was also used as the main artistic medium for the theme of the contest, as an expression of binding cultures.

On the night of the final for the 2012 contest , the chief executive of SVT, Eva Hamilton , stated to the Swedish media that various venues in Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö were being considered for hosting the 2013 contest. One alternative put forward in the Expressen was to hold the competition at three venues – the semi-finals in Gothenburg and Malmö, and the final in Stockholm. This proposal was dismissed as unfeasible by SVT, which declared that the contest would be hosted in only one city.

On 20 June 2012, it was announced that Gothenburg had withdrawn from the bidding process due to the city being the host of the Göteborg Horse Show in late April 2013. There were also concerns about the availability of hotel rooms due to a variety of other events taking place in the same time frame as the Eurovision Song Contest. On 9 July, the executive producer for the 2013 contest, Martin Österdahl , told the Swedish press "that he felt uncomfortable with the decisions and choices made by the countries that had previously hosted the contest", stating that he and SVT wanted the 2013 contest to be "smaller, closer and personal". SVT also claimed that the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) also disclosed that the EBU had asked potential future host broadcasters that "there were demands about reducing the scale of the event, given the increased costs of recent editions".

The following candidate cities had provisionally reserved venues and hotel rooms, as part of their bids to host the 2013 contest. On 8 July 2012, the Malmö Arena was confirmed as the host venue for the contest. Malmö Arena is Sweden's fourth-largest indoor arena, after Friends Arena , Tele2 Arena and Globe Arena , all located in Stockholm.

Key † Host venue

On 21 December 2012, the EBU announced that broadcasters from 39 countries would compete in the Eurovision Song Contest 2013. Armenia , which was last represented in 2011 , confirmed that it would be returning to the contest following a one-year break. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Portugal both decided not to enter the 2013 contest due to financial difficulties, while Slovakia and Turkey did not participate for different reasons.

Valentina Monetta who had represented San Marino in 2012 , returned to the contest for the second year in a row. She would also return in 2014 and in 2017 . Elitsa Todorova and Stoyan Yankoulov had represented Bulgaria in 2007 . Nevena Božović , representing Serbia as part of Moje 3 , was the first contestant to compete in the Eurovision Song Contest after competing in the Junior Eurovision Song Contest , where she came third for Serbia in 2007 . She would also represent Serbia in 2019 .

Bledar Sejko , representing Albania, was the on-stage guitarist for Albania in 2011 . Gor Sujyan , representing Armenia, was a backing vocalist for Armenia in 2010 . Aliona Moon , representing Moldova, was a backing vocalist for Moldova in 2012 . In addition, Pasha Parfeny , who represented Moldova in 2012, was the composer of the 2013 Moldovan entry and accompanied Aliona Moon on stage on the piano. Lauri Pihlap and Kaido Põldma, who were backing vocalists for Estonia, had won Eurovision as part of the group 2XL for Estonia in 2001 , together with Dave Benton and Tanel Padar .

Active EBU member broadcasters in Andorra , Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Czech Republic , Luxembourg , Monaco , Morocco , Poland , Portugal and Slovakia confirmed non-participation prior to the announcement of the participants list by the EBU. Turkish broadcaster TRT did the same, citing dissatisfaction with the 2009 introduction of a mixed jury/televote voting system and the status of the " Big Five " rule.

Liechtensteiner broadcaster 1FLTV had been trying to join the EBU since 2010. Director Peter Kölbel had said that due to a lack of financial subsidies from the government, EBU membership participation to participate in the contest would be impossible to obtain until 2013 at the earliest; however, it was later announced that the country would not take part in 2013.

The combination of televoting and jury voting results underwent changes that were detailed in the official rules for the 2013 contest. Each member of a respective country's jury was required to rank every song, except that of their own country. The voting results from each member of a particular country's jury were combined to produce an overall ranking from first to last place. Likewise, the televoting results were also interpreted as a full ranking, taking into account the full televoting result rather than just the top ten. The combination of the jury's full ranking and the televote's full ranking produced an overall ranking of all competing entries. The song which scored the highest overall rank received 12 points, while the tenth-best ranked song received 1-point. It was announced in the official Media Handbook that an official app would also be available for voters to vote via during the contest.

Official sponsors of the broadcast were the main Swedish-Finnish telecommunication company TeliaSonera , and the German cosmetics company Schwarzkopf [ de ] . The competition sponsors were the makeup company IsaDora cosmetics , the supermarket ICA and Tetra Pak .

The Stockholm based singer and actress Sarah Dawn Finer also appeared in both semi-finals and the final in sketches as the comic character Lynda Woodruff. "Lynda" presented the votes for Sweden at the previous contest in Baku. Finer also appeared in the final as herself, performing the ABBA song " The Winner Takes It All " before the results were announced. The ex- Swedish football captain Zlatan Ibrahimović was revealed on 28 April to be part of the opening segment of the Eurovision final, in a pre-recorded message welcoming viewers to Malmö, his home city. Eric Saade , who represented Sweden in 2011 , was the host of the green room during the final.

The draw that determined the semi-final allocation was held on 17 January 2013 at the Malmö City Hall. A draw at the EBU headquarters determined that, due to their geographical proximity with Malmö, Denmark would perform in the first semi-final, while Norway would perform in the second semi-final. This provided a maximum availability of tickets for visitors from both countries. The EBU also allocated Israel to the second semi-final after a request from the delegation in order to avoid complications with a national holiday coinciding with the date of the first semi-final. The remaining participating countries, excluding the automatic finalists (France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom), were split into five pots, based on voting patterns from the previous nine years. From these pots, 15 (in addition to Denmark) were allocated to compete in the first semi-final on 14 May 2013 and 15 (in addition to Norway and Israel) were allocated to compete in the second semi-final on 16 May 2013.

The pots were calculated by the televoting partner Digame and were as follows:

Unlike previous years, the running order was not decided by the drawing of lots , but instead by the producers, with the aim of making the shows more exciting and ensuring that all entries had a chance to stand out, preventing those that are too similar cancelling each other out. The decision elicited mixed reactions from both fans of the contest and participating broadcasters.

The running order for the semi-finals was released on 28 March 2013. The running order for the final was determined on 17 May 2013. An additional allocation draw occurred for the final with each finalist country drawing to perform either in the first or second half of the final. The allocation draw for qualifying countries from the semi-finals occurred during the semi-final winners' press conferences following each semi-final, while the allocation draw for the Big Five countries (France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom) occurred during their first individual press conferences on 15 May 2013. As the host country, the running order position for Sweden in the final was exclusively determined by a draw during the heads of delegation meeting on 18 March 2013. Sweden was drawn to perform 16th in the final.

As aforesaid, SVT wanted to make a good use of Malmö Arena's space to highlight the performances and increase the audience's visibility compared to previous years. SVT created a main stage and a smaller stage with higher-lower shifted floors, connected by a trail closely surrounded by a standing crowd from both sides of it and around the small stage. The main stage mobility was expressed as a main artistic medium at the opening act of the second semi-final and with highlighting Moldova's performance towards its finish, as a movable part beneath the singer's dress making her look gradually taller. The small stage mobility highlighted United Kingdom's performance towards its finish, lifted above the close-standing audience.

On 17 January 2013, at the semi-final allocation draw, the EBU revealed the graphic design, created by the Gothenburg-based branding agency Happy F&B for the 2013 contest, featuring a butterfly and the slogan "We Are One". The butterfly featured an array of colours and textures, while also representing the butterfly effect idea. Meanwhile, the slogan "We Are One" highlighted equality and unity of all the participating countries alongside the cultural diversity and influence of each participant.

SVT confirmed on 19 February 2013 that the postcard films, used to introduce each song in the contest, would feature each artist in their respective country, to give the viewer a personal insight of each competing participant. This broke with recent tradition of the postcards often containing short segments of life within either the host city or country of the contest. The postcards were produced by Camp David, the on-air graphics by Broken Doll, and the animation of the butterflies by visual effects studio Swiss International. In addition to the graphic design, there was a theme music for the contest, titled "Wolverine" and composed by Adam Kafe, which was used in the intros and in-between commercial breaks.

On 11 July 2012, show producer Christer Björkman advised the public not to buy tickets for the 2013 contest that are currently in circulation and instead to wait for tickets to be released through official channels. Björkman said that official tickets had not yet been released, as necessary decisions over the stage and seating plans had not yet been made. Björkman also gave reassurance that accommodation would be available, as while the organisers had booked a large quantity of hotel rooms, some may be made available to the general public. On 21 November 2012, SVT officially announced the launch of ticket sales.

On 17 October 2012, executive producer Martin Österdahl told Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter that SVT plans for the 2013 contest to have only one presenter for the entire event, unlike in previous years when there were up to three presenters per show. The last time only one presenter hosted the entire contest was in 1995 , when the solo host was Mary Kennedy . Petra Mede was announced as the host of the 2013 contest on 28 January 2013.

The first semi-final took place on 14 May 2013 at 21:00 CEST . All the countries competing in this semi-final were eligible to vote, plus Italy , Sweden and the United Kingdom . The highlighted countries qualified for the final.

The second semi-final took place on 16 May 2013 at 21:00 CEST . All the countries competing in this semi-final were eligible to vote, plus France , Germany and Spain . The highlighted countries qualified for the final.

The final took place on 18 May 2013 at 21:00 CEST and was won by Denmark. The "Big Five" and the host country, Sweden, qualified directly for the final. From the two semi-finals on 14 and 16 May 2013, twenty countries qualified for the final. A total of 26 countries competed in the final and all 39 participants voted.

For the first time since the 1985 contest, which was, coincidentally, held in Sweden as well, no country of the former Yugoslavia participated in the final of the Eurovision Song Contest.

This year, for the first time ever, the winner was announced as soon as it was mathematically impossible to catch up. In this case, the winner had been determined by the 35th vote out of the 39, which came from Macedonia. This practice would continue for the next two years as well.

Denmark won with 281 points. Azerbaijan came second with 234 points, with Ukraine, Norway, Russia, Greece, Italy, Malta, Netherlands and Hungary completing the top ten. Lithuania, France, Finland, Spain and Ireland occupied the bottom five positions.

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing, in English or French, the votes for its respective country. The order in which each country announced their votes was determined in a draw following the jury results from final dress rehearsal. Similar to the 2012 contest an algorithm was used to generate as much suspense as possible. The spokespersons are shown alongside each country.

The EBU published the split results of the semi-finals and final on 29 May 2013. Unlike in previous years, a full points breakdown of the jury and public voting was not revealed. Instead, an average ranking was provided for each country based on the votes of the juries and televote in isolation.

Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the first semi-final:

Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the second semi-final:

Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the final:

It was reported by the EBU that the 2013 contest was viewed by a worldwide television audience of 170 million viewers.

Prior to the finals, the Lithuanian media outlet 15min released an undercover video suggesting that representatives from Azerbaijan were trying to bribe Lithuanians for votes in the televoting. The video detailed the plan, which involved recruiting groups of ten people each, and supplying them with SIM cards so they could vote multiple times during the voting window. It was also suggested that similar activity was taking place in a total of fifteen countries including Latvia, Estonia, Belarus, Ukraine, Croatia and Switzerland. In response to the allegations, Executive Supervisor Jon Ola Sand reaffirmed the contest's commitment to a "fair and transparent result". He stated that while Eurovision organisers were looking into the case, they "[emphasised] that the intention of these individuals have not yet been clarified, and nor has a link been established between the individuals in the video and the Azeri delegation, the Azeri act or the Azeri EBU member Ictimai TV ." He added that, since 1998, when he was first involved with the contest, "every year there are rumors about irregularities in the voting".

The EBU later confirmed an attempt of cheating in the contest, which was unsuccessful according to EBU as the EBU's system prevents fraud. According to the EBU, there is no evidence that any broadcaster has been involved in cheating. The rules were changed the next year to ensure that all participating broadcasters would be responsible for preventing fraud to their advantage or face a three-year suspension if fraud is revealed. However, in May 2015, a member of the contest's Reference Group confirmed that Azerbaijan had cheated, and that it was organized and very expensive.

When Azerbaijan officially awarded no points to Dina Garipova of Russia, despite Garipova having reportedly come second in the country's phone poll, the Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev ordered an inquiry. The Russian Foreign Affairs Minister Sergei Lavrov claimed that the result had been falsified, and stated that "this outrageous action will not remain without a response". He promised a co-ordinated response with his Azerbaijani counterpart Elmar Mammadyarov . Simultaneously, the Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko claimed that his own country having received no points from Russia showed that the result must have been falsified.

The entry for Germany, " Glorious " by Cascada , was the subject of investigation by NDR following allegations that it was too similar to the 2012 winner, " Euphoria " by Loreen . NDR spokeswoman Iris Bents played down the allegations, stating that "Every year there are attempts to create scandals around the Eurovision Song Contest and the participants." Following an independent audit, "Glorious" was found not to have plagiarized "Euphoria".

Allegations of plagiarism against the winning Danish entry " Only Teardrops " surfaced after Eric van Tijn , a notable Dutch music producer, mentioned the opening flute solo's similarity to "I Surrender", a 2002 song by the Dutch band K-Otic. However, Van Tijn also stated that the flute solo was the only similarity between the two songs, thus calling it "a storm in a teacup".

The performance of the Finnish entry, " Marry Me ", caused controversy in some countries broadcasting the contest. The act featured Krista Siegfrids and one of her female backing singers kissing each other at the end, widely labelled in media as Eurovision's first "lesbian kiss". Siegfrids stated to the media that the act was done to encourage Finland to legalise same-sex marriage . It was reported that Turkish and Greek media reacted negatively to Siegfrids' act. According to Gay Star News , the Turkish broadcaster TRT , which had previously decided not to participate itself, initially indicated that it would still broadcast the contest, but made a late decision not to do so.

Green room host Eric Saade referred to Petra Mede as a " MILF " on air during the break between the first and second halves of the voting, saying "Back to you, Petra. # MILF". When the broadcaster for the United Kingdom, BBC aired this, the sound was lost. It remains unknown whether this was just an accident, or if the BBC did it purposely. While the statement was supposedly scripted and SVT were aware of Saade's plan, some on social media were confused and offended by the comment.

In addition to the main winner's trophy, the Marcel Bezençon Awards and the Barbara Dex Award were contested during the 2013 Eurovision Song Contest. The OGAE , "General Organisation of Eurovision Fans" voting poll also took place before the contest.

The Marcel Bezençon Awards , organised since 2002 by Sweden's then-Head of Delegation and 1992 representative Christer Björkman , and 1984 winner Richard Herrey , honours songs in the contest's final. The awards are divided into three categories: Artistic Award, Composers Award, and Press Award.

OGAE , an organisation of over forty Eurovision Song Contest fan clubs across Europe and beyond, conducts an annual voting poll first held in 2002 as the Marcel Bezençon Fan Award. After all votes were cast, the top-ranked entry in the 2013 poll was also the winner of the contest, " Only Teardrops " performed by Emmelie de Forest ; the top five results are shown below.

The Barbara Dex Award is a humorous fan award given to the worst dressed artist each year. Named after Belgium's representative who came last in the 1993 contest, wearing her self-designed dress, the award was handed by the fansite House of Eurovision from 1997 to 2016 and is being carried out by the fansite songfestival.be since 2017.

Eurovision Song Contest: Malmö 2013 was a compilation album put together by the EBU, and released by CMC International and Universal Music Group on 29 April 2013. The album featured all 39 songs that entered in the 2013 contest including the semi-finalists that failed to qualify into the grand final. The digital version featured a bonus track, " We Write the Story ", composed by Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson of ABBA , and DJ and music producer Avicii .

Guitar Hero is a series of rhythm games first released in 2005, in which players use a guitar -shaped game controller to simulate playing primarily lead , bass , and rhythm guitar across numerous songs. Players match notes that scroll on-screen to colored fret buttons on the controller, strumming the controller in time to the music in order to score points, and keep the virtual audience excited.  The games attempt to mimic many features of playing a real guitar, including the use of fast-fingering hammer-ons and pull-offs and the use of the whammy bar to alter the pitch of notes. Most games support single player modes, typically a Career mode to play through all the songs in the game, as well as competitive and cooperative multiplayer modes. With the introduction of Guitar Hero World Tour in 2008, the game includes support for a four-player band including vocals and drums. The series initially used mostly cover versions of songs created by WaveGroup Sound , but most recent titles feature soundtracks that are fully master recordings , and in some cases, special re-recordings, of the songs. Later titles in the series feature support for downloadable content in the form of new songs.

In 2005, RedOctane , a company specializing in the manufacture of unique game controllers, was inspired to create Guitar Hero based on its experience creating hardware for Konami 's GuitarFreaks arcade game . It enlisted Harmonix , which had previously developed several music video games, for development assistance. The first game in the series was made on a budget of US$ 1 million. The series became extremely successful, leading to the acquisition of RedOctane by Activision in 2007. Harmonix was acquired by MTV Games and went on to create the Rock Band series of music games in the same vein as Guitar Hero . Activision brought Neversoft (primarily known for their Tony Hawk series of skateboarding games) on board for future development duties. Additional companies, such as Budcat Creations and Vicarious Visions , have assisted in the adaptation of the games for other systems.

The series has twenty-five releases, including the two spin-offs , the DJ Hero series and Band Hero . The Guitar Hero franchise was a primary brand during the emergence of the popularity of rhythm games as a cultural phenomenon in North America. Such games have been utilized as a learning and development tool for medical purposes. The first game in the series was considered by several journalists to be one of the most influential video games of the first decade of the 21st century. The series has sold more than 25 million units worldwide, earning US$2 billion at retail.

Despite early success, the series, along with the overall rhythm game genre, suffered from poor sales starting in 2009. Despite asserting consumer research suggested continued solid demand for the series, Activision later stated that the series was on hiatus for 2011, amid the development of a seventh main installment that was later cancelled as the emerging product was considered to be of poor quality. Activision later shut down sales of the series' downloadable content, although users who purchased material from it previously may still play what they bought.

Guitar Hero Live , released in October 2015, was the first new title in the series in five years, considered to be a reboot of the series and developed by FreeStyleGames , which had developed the DJ Hero games. Following a lukewarm reception and sales, Activision laid off many of the game's developers and sold the studio to Ubisoft , later shutting down the game's streaming DLC service.

Guitar Hero was created from a partnership between RedOctane , then their own company that produced specialized video game controllers, and Harmonix , a music video game development company who had previously produced Frequency , Amplitude , and Karaoke Revolution . RedOctane was seeking to bring in a GuitarFreaks -like game, highly popular in Japan at the time, into Western markets, and approached Harmonix about helping them to develop a music game involving a guitar controller. Both companies agreed to it, and went on to produce Guitar Hero in 2005. The title was highly successful, leading to the development of its successful sequel, Guitar Hero II , in 2006. While the original controllers for the first Guitar Hero game were designed by Ryan Lesser, Rob Kay, Greg LoPiccolo, and Alex Rigopulous of Harmonix and built by the Honeybee Corporation of China, subsequent iterations and future controllers were developed inhouse at RedOctane.

Both RedOctane and Harmonix experienced changes in 2006. RedOctane was bought by Activision in June — who spent US$ 100 million to acquire the Guitar Hero franchise — while it was announced in October that Harmonix would be purchased by MTV Games . As a result of the two purchases, Harmonix would no longer develop future games in the Guitar Hero series. Instead, that responsibility would go to Neversoft , a subsidiary of Activision known for developing the Tony Hawk's series of skateboarding games. Neversoft was chosen to helm the Guitar Hero series after Neversoft founder, Joel Jewett, admitted to the RedOctane founders, Kai and Charles Huang, that his development team for Tony Hawk's Project 8 went to work on weekends just to play Guitar Hero . Activision CEO Bobby Kotick believed that Neversoft would help them bring great games to the series, but on reflection, stated that had Activision explored Harmonix further as a continued developer for the series, things "may have turned out differently". In addition, Activision began seeking other markets for the game; a Nintendo DS version of the series was developed by Vicarious Visions , while a Guitar Hero Mobile series was created for mobile phones . The company also began considering the expansion of the series to band-specific titles with Guitar Hero: Aerosmith . Later, in November 2008, Activision acquired Budcat Creations , another development studio that had helped with the PlayStation 2 versions of Guitar Hero III and World Tour , announcing that they would be helping to develop another game in the Guitar Hero series.

In 2007, Harmonix and MTV Games released a new music title through rival publisher Electronic Arts , called Rock Band . It expanded upon the gameplay popularized by the Guitar Hero series by adding drum and microphone instruments, allowing players to simulate playing songs as bands. Activision followed suit with the release of Guitar Hero World Tour in 2008, which supported multiple instruments. In 2009, Activision tripled its Guitar Hero offerings, and in addition to further continuation of the existing main series with Guitar Hero 5 and expansions, they introduced the titles Band Hero , geared towards more family-friendly pop music , and DJ Hero , a game based on turntablism and featuring a number of mixes . With the release of Guitar Hero 5 , Activision considered the series to have moved away from its heavy metal basis into a broader selection of music. Guitar Hero 5 is the first game in the series to use a new version of the series' logo; previous games used a logo in a font with sharper "points" on the letters, which was considered "idiosyncratic with a vengeance" to match the games' emphasis on heavy metal music. Activision used the services of the Pentagram design studio to refashion the game's logo. Pentagram developed a new font, removing some of the "aggressive odd" features to make the typeface more suitable and amendable to design feature incorporation to other games such as Band Hero and DJ Hero .

The results of the expanded offerings did not contribute well to the series, alongside the late-2000s recession ; sales of most rhythm games including Guitar Hero and DJ Hero did not meet expectations, falling about 50% short of projected targets. Activision announced it would be cutting back to only 10 SKUs within 2010 instead of the 25 in 2009. Though RedOctane and Neversoft continued to develop the 6th main game, Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock , until its completion, both studios were later shuttered by Activision, moving key personnel into Activision directly for future game development, and in the case of Neversoft, closing its Guitar Hero division, while transferring future development duties for the series to Vicarious Visions, another Activision studio which had been fundamental in building the Wii and Nintendo DS versions of the games. In November 2010, Activision also closed Budcat Creations , the arm of the publisher that was primarily responsible for porting the Guitar Hero games to the PlayStation 2.

Ahead of Activision's 2010 fourth quarter financial report in February 2011, Activision disbanded its Guitar Hero business unit and announced that it would cease development of the planned 2011 Guitar Hero game. Activision cited "continued declines in the music genre" to explain its decision. The closure also affected the DJ Hero series, as Activision stated that there were no plans to publish a music game during 2011. Activision's vice president Dan Winters later clarified that the company was "just putting Guitar Hero on hiatus" and that they were "just not making a new game for next year, that's all".

In a July 2011 interview with Forbes , Kotick stated that while the publisher was "going to stop selling Guitar Hero altogether", they were "going to go back to the studios and we're going to use new studios and reinvent" the series, but a former team member of Vicarious Visions stated that as of 2012, all development of Guitar Hero had come to an end within Activision. Another source close to Vicarious Visions had reported to Kotaku that while Guitar Hero 7 was in development under an Activision studio, the game was considered a "disaster". The cancelled game omitted the additional instruments and used only a guitar peripheral, redesigning the unit to include a 6-button mechanism replacing the strum bar; the resulting unit was considered too expensive to manufacture and purchase. The developers had also started the game development from scratch to try to create new characters and venues that would be more reactive to the actual songs being played to give the feel of a music video, but ultimately this proved too much of a challenge and had to be scrapped. Further, with a limited budget, the song selection was limited to "low-budget" hits of the 1990s, or at times reusing songs that had previously been included in Guitar Hero games. Though the team had a two-year development cycle, it was closed down after Activision president Eric Hirshber had seen the current state of the project at the one-year point.

Another potential Guitar Hero project was discovered by the archival site Unseen64 for a game titled Hero World , a massively multiplayer online game that would link the Guitar Hero and DJ Hero games. The game had been developed by FreeStyleGames , sometime after the release of DJ Hero 2 , with the main development duties passed to Virtual Fairground , using their platform The Ride, an Adobe Flash -based platform that would let the game be played in a web browser. The game was cancelled in 2011 along with other pending Guitar Hero projects.

No further downloadable content for either Guitar Hero or DJ Hero was made after February 2011, though Activision committed to releasing content that was already in development by that time due to fan response; later, in a move described by Game Informer as "the final nail in [the series'] coffins", Activision announced it would discontinue all DLC sales for the series without revoking access to tracks already bought as of March 31, 2014. Though Activision had moved away from the Guitar Hero series, the lessons learned helped them and developer Toys for Bob to handle the manufacturing and outsourcing  issues that came with the highly successful Skylanders toy and video game franchise.

In April 2015, Activision announced a new entry in the series, titled Guitar Hero Live . The title was developed by Activision's internal studio FreeStyleGames, who previously had worked on the DJ Hero spinoff titles. FreeStyleGames were given free rein to reboot the Guitar Hero series for next-generation consoles. One of their first innovations was to drop the standard five-button guitar controller, ultimately designing a six-button guitar controller, with two rows of three buttons each, allowing them to mimic actual guitar fingering. Guitar Hero Live was released with both a career and an online mode. The career mode used full-motion video taken from the perspective of a lead guitarist underneath the note highway, to create an immersive experience to the player. The online mode, called GHTV , discarded the previous downloadable content approach and used a music video channel approach to stream playable songs to players, adding new songs to the catalog on a weekly basis. The game was released in October 2015.

Though the game was praised as a reinvention of the Guitar Hero series, the game did not sell as well as Activision expected; due to lowered forecasts, Activision let go of about half of FreeStyleGames' developers. In January 2017, Ubisoft acquired FreeStyleGames from Activision, with unclear consequences for the game. Activision shut down GHTV on December 1, 2018, reducing the available songs from almost 500 to the 42 present on-disc.

In 2020 online servers for all Guitar Hero games were shut down on PS3. Between this and the closure of Wii online servers for all games, they are now only playable online on Xbox 360.

The original Guitar Hero was released on the PlayStation 2 in November 2005. Guitar Hero is notable because it comes packaged with a controller peripheral modeled after a black Gibson SG guitar. Rather than a typical gamepad , this guitar controller is the primary input for the game. Playing the game with the guitar controller simulates playing an actual guitar, except it uses five colored "fret buttons" and a " strum bar" instead of frets and strings. The development of Guitar Hero was inspired by Konami 's GuitarFreaks video game, which at the time, had not seen much exposure in the North American market; RedOctane, already selling guitar-shaped controllers for imported copies of GuitarFreaks , approached Harmonix about creating a game to use an entirely new Guitar controller. The concept was to have the gameplay of Amplitude with the visuals of Karaoke Revolution , both of which had been developed by Harmonix. The game was met with critical acclaim and received numerous awards for its innovative guitar peripheral and its soundtrack, which comprised 47 playable rock songs (most of which were cover versions of popular songs from artists and bands from the 1960s through modern rock). Guitar Hero has sold nearly 1.5 million copies to date.

The popularity of the series increased dramatically with the release of Guitar Hero II for the PlayStation 2 in 2006. Featuring improved multiplayer gameplay, an improved note-recognizing system, and 64 songs, it became the fifth best-selling video game of 2006. The PlayStation 2 version of the game was offered both separately and in a bundle with a cherry red Gibson SG guitar controller. Guitar Hero II was later released for the Xbox 360 in April 2007 with an exclusive Gibson Explorer guitar controller and an additional 10 songs, among other features. About 3 million units of Guitar Hero II have sold on the PlayStation 2 and Xbox 360.

Guitar Hero III: Legends of Rock was released in late 2007 for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , Wii , Microsoft Windows , and Mac OS X platforms. The title is the first installment of the series to include wireless guitars bundled with the game and also the first to release a special bundle with two guitars.  The game includes Slash and Tom Morello as playable characters in addition to the existing fictional avatars; both guitarists performed motion capture to be used for their characters' animation in the game. The game opened to critically acclaimed reviews from critics and fans alike, with most calling it the greatest entry in the series. As PGNx Media stated on Metacritic , " Guitar Hero III: Legends of Rock is undoubtedly the best game in the series." The game later became one of the best selling video games of all time and the first ever game to reach 1 billion dollars in sales.

Guitar Hero World Tour , previously named Guitar Hero IV , is the fourth full game in the series and was released on October 26, 2008 for PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, and Wii.  Analysts had expected that future Guitar Hero games in 2008 would include additional instrument peripherals to compete against Rock Band ; Guitar Hero World Tour was confirmed as in development following the announcement of the merger between Activision and Vivendi Games in December 2007. Activision's CEO Bobby Kotick announced on April 21, 2008 that Guitar Hero World Tour will branch out into other instruments including vocals. Guitar Hero World Tour includes drums and vocals, and can be bought packaged with a new drum set controller, a microphone, and the standard guitar controller. A larger number of real-world musicians appear as playable characters, including Jimi Hendrix , Billy Corgan , Hayley Williams , Zakk Wylde , Ted Nugent , Travis Barker , Sting , and Ozzy Osbourne . Guitar Hero World Tour also features custom song creation that can be shared with others.

Guitar Hero 5 , the fifth main entry in the series, was confirmed in December 2008. It was released on September 1, 2009, and includes 85 songs from 83 different artists. The game includes new game modes and features, including its 'Party Mode,' which gives players the ability to drop-in and out and change difficulties in the middle of a song. Artists including Johnny Cash , Matt Bellamy , Carlos Santana , Kurt Cobain and Shirley Manson appear as playable characters in the game.

Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock , the sixth main console game in the series, was released on September 28, 2010. It is the last game in the series developed by Neversoft's Guitar Hero division prior to its dissolution, with Vicarious Visions assisting on the Wii version with added Nintendo DS functionality. The game has been described as returning to the roots of the Guitar Hero series; while it still allows for full band play, the soundtrack's focus is on rock and roll music and an emphasis on guitar "shredding". The game introduced a career-based "Quest Mode", narrated by Gene Simmons , that guides the players to complete songs to unlock "warriors of rock" to join them in saving "demigod of rock" and his guitar from his imprisonment by "the Beast".

Following a five-year hiatus, as described below, Activision announced Guitar Hero Live for release in late 2015 on most seventh-generation and eighth-generation consoles. Live was developed to rebuild the game from the ground up, and while the gameplay remains similar to the earlier titles, focusing primarily on the lead guitar, it uses a 3-button guitar controller with each button having "up" and "down" positions, making for more complex tabulators. The game uses live footage of a rock concert, taken from the perspective of the lead guitarist, to provide a more immersive experience.

Guitar Hero Encore: Rocks the 80s for the PlayStation 2, which was released in July 2007, was the final game Harmonix developed for the series. Though it was produced after Harmonix was purchased by MTV Games, they were contractually obligated to finish the game, which as suggested by its name primarily features songs from the 1980s. The game was criticized for its small selection of songs, and in one case compared unfavorably to Lou Reed 's album Metal Machine Music for allegedly being a mere contractual obligation project.

Guitar Hero: Aerosmith was the first Guitar Hero game to center on one specific artist. On September 4, 2007, Billboard announced that Aerosmith was "working closely with the makers of Guitar Hero IV ", which would be "dedicated to the group's music". On February 15, 2008, Activision announced that Guitar Hero: Aerosmith would be released on June 29, 2008. Guitar Hero: Aerosmith was developed by Neversoft for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions, by Vicarious Visions for the Wii, and by Budcat Creations for the PlayStation 2. The game's setlist is mostly Aerosmith songs, with other songs from Joe Perry ' s solo work or artists that have inspired or performed with Aerosmith, including Run-DMC .

Guitar Hero: Metallica , the next entry in the series to center on one artist, was released on March 29, 2009. It is based on the full band experience of World Tour , and educates players on Metallica's history and music in the same manner as Guitar Hero: Aerosmith did for Aerosmith. The game also debuted a new difficulty for drums, called Expert+ (read "expert-plus"), intended to incorporate a second bass drum pedal for songs that would otherwise be too difficult to play on drums. The game received generally well reviews with fans praising the song selection and the heavily enforced Metallica theme.

Guitar Hero Smash Hits (titled Guitar Hero Greatest Hits in Europe and Australia) was released in June 2009. It features full-band versions of 48 songs from earlier Guitar Hero games that only used the guitar controller. Unlike the previous versions, each of the songs is based on a master recording that includes some live tracks. The game follows a similar model as Guitar Hero: Metallica , and was developed Beenox for the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation 2, and Wii. It received a lukewarm reception with many calling it unnecessary and a "cash grab."

DJ Hero was announced by Activision in May 2009. Prior to the announcement, the company had purchased FreeStyleGames, a small developer of music games, to help produce localized downloadable content for Guitar Hero games and a then-unannounced music game, later revealed to be DJ Hero . DJ Hero uses a special turntable -based controller for players to perform with on various song mixes in the game. The game also incorporates the use of a Guitar Hero controller on ten specially arranged tracks; Bright suggested that future Guitar Hero games after Guitar Hero 5 could include the use of the turntable control.

Band Hero was announced in May 2009 and features " Top 40 " hits aimed at family audiences, using the full band play style of Guitar Hero 5 . The game was also developed for the Nintendo DS, using the Guitar Hero: On Tour Guitar Grip, a new "drum skin" to fit the DS Lite , and the DS's microphone to support the full band experience. Musician Taylor Swift appears as a playable character in the game, as do the members of No Doubt .

Guitar Hero: Van Halen was released on December 22, 2009, though customers that purchased Guitar Hero 5 under a special promotion received a copy of the game early. Like the other games oriented around a specific artist, Guitar Hero: Van Halen mainly uses songs by the band Van Halen , including three guitar solos by Eddie Van Halen , in addition to guest acts such as Queen , Weezer , Blink-182 , Foo Fighters , The Offspring , and Queens of the Stone Age .

A sequel to DJ Hero , DJ Hero 2 , was officially announced in June 2010 for release in the last quarter of 2010, featuring more than 70 mashups from over 85 artists. The game includes several new gameplay modes, including an "Empire" career mode, head-to-head DJ battles, social multiplayer modes, and a jump-in and out Party Play mode similar to Guitar Hero 5 .  The game also includes more vocal options for singing and rapping to songs, and a freestyle mode for players.

Guitar Hero: On Tour was released on the Nintendo DS hand-held system on June 22, 2008. The game includes a peripheral, dubbed the "Guitar Grip", a rectangular device that fits into the second slot of the Nintendo DS or DS Lite.  The peripheral only features the first four fret buttons and a strap so the Nintendo DS can be held sideways comfortably for play. The game also includes a guitar pick shaped stylus for use with strumming in the game, which players move across the touchscreen. Guitar Hero: On Tour was developed by Vicarious Visions , who also ported the Guitar Hero games to Nintendo 's Wii console.

A sequel, Guitar Hero On Tour: Decades , was released in November 2008, featuring music spanning four decades. A third title in the series, Guitar Hero On Tour: Modern Hits , was announced following various rumors of its existence, and was released in June 2009, featuring songs recorded since the year 2000. Both games use the "Guitar Grip" controller, and allow two players to compete against each other using any version of the On Tour series, with songs being shared between versions.

Band Hero was also ported to the Nintendo DS by Vicarious Visions, expanding the play to include vocals (through the DS microphone) and drumming. The drumming uses a special "drum skin" adapter designed for the Nintendo DS Lite to map the unit's face buttons to four drum pads. However, the peripheral is not compatible with the original Nintendo DS model or the Nintendo DSi. However, since the drum skin is not electronic but a rubber cover switch that duplicates certain buttons on the DS Lite, a player can simply press the buttons in time to play the drums. The game includes four-player local wireless play in a similar manner as Guitar Hero 5 allowing any combination of instruments to be used. The game has a set of 30 songs; some are from Band Hero and others are from several Guitar Hero games' set lists.

Guitar Hero: On Tour does not work on the Nintendo DSi and Nintendo 3DS because unlike the Nintendo DS, they do not have Game Boy Advance slots. Band Hero is limited to vocals and drums on the two consoles for the same reason.

Guitar Hero III Mobile was released for mobile phones in 2007 and 2008, and was developed by MachineWorks Northwest LLC.  The base version of the game includes 15 songs from both Guitar Hero II and Guitar Hero III , and has released a three-song add-on pack every month since January 2008.  The title has been downloaded by users one million times, with both Verizon and Hands-On Mobile claiming that over 250,000 songs are played a day on the platform. The two companies produced two other mobile-based Guitar Hero games; Guitar Hero III: Backstage Pass , released in July 2008, adds role-playing elements to manage the band's success in addition to the core rhythm game, while the mobile version of Guitar Hero World Tour , released in December 2008, expands each included track for play on both lead guitar and drums, mimicking the expansion of the console series to the full band.

Glu Mobile developed the mobile version of Guitar Hero 5 , released in the last quarter of 2009.

Activision and RedOctane also worked with Basic Fun, Inc. to produce Guitar Hero Carabiner , a handheld electronic game that features excerpts of several songs taken from the first two games.

Activision and Konami, who had previously worked together to make sure that the Guitar Hero series meets with Konami's patents on music games, in conjunction with Raw Thrills , developed an arcade console version of the game, titled Guitar Hero Arcade , distributed to arcades in early 2009.  The game is completely based on the Guitar Hero III gameplay, but reducing some of the features such as the use of the Whammy bar, Star Power Button (Star Power may only be activated by lifting the Guitar) and Practice Modes, but keeping the ability to download new songs for the cabinet from the Internet. The arcade game has come under some scrutiny by the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP), who believe the use of the game in arcades is equivalent to "public performances" and seek additional fees to be paid by operators of the game.

The double release of Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero in 2009 were the last of the series' games to be released on PlayStation 2. It was expected that the 2010 entry for Guitar Hero , Warriors of Rock , would be the final entry developed by Neversoft, based on claims that Neversoft would be letting go of its Guitar Hero division, with Vicarious Visions likely poised to take over future development. Further industry rumors pointed at the closure of RedOctane Studios and Underground Development (the development studio for Guitar Hero: Van Halen ) as further results from the scaling-back; Activision moved the controller hardware development within their own division to continue to support the series, with RedOctane founders Kai and Charles Huang remaining with Activision. A week prior to these announcements, the Guitar Hero division CEO at Activision, Dan Rosensweig , left the company, leading to some speculation on whether Rosensweig's departure influenced these changes. Activision and RedOctane had trademarked the titles " Guitar Villain ", " Drum Villain ", " Keyboard Hero " and " Sing Hero ". RedOctane originally trademarked the titles " Drum Hero " and " Band Hero ", but the work performed towards the Drum Hero title was eventually folded into the gameplay for Guitar Hero World Tour , and Band Hero became its own game. Later, as of October 2009, Activision reapplied for a Drum Hero trademark. Pi Studios, which had previously helped to port Rock Band to the Wii, had started work on the karaoke title Sing Hero before Activision cancelled its development. Dance Hero was also said to have been in development as of 2011.

Dave Mustaine , frontman for Megadeth , stated he had been in talks with Activision and Neversoft for a Guitar Hero -related product. It was later revealed that Mustaine was working with Activision for music in Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock , including an original track ("Sudden Death") recorded specifically for the game.

Two Guitar Hero products that were announced but never released were a Red Hot Chili Peppers -themed title and a PlayStation Portable title that would have featured a drum component.

The core gameplay of the Guitar Hero games is a rhythm video game similar to Konami's GuitarFreaks and to a lesser extent Harmonix's previous music games such as Frequency and Amplitude . The guitar controller is recommended for play, although a standard console controller can be used instead. However, the guitar controller has been required for play ever since the inclusion of drum and vocal parts in the series. The game supports toggling the handedness of the guitar, allowing both left-handed and right-handed players to utilize the guitar controller.

While playing the game, an extended guitar neck is shown vertically on the screen (the frets horizontal), often called the "note highway", and as the song progresses, colored markers or "gems" indicating notes travel down the screen in time with the music; the note colors and positions match those of the five fret keys on the guitar controller. Once the note(s) reach the bottom, the player must play the indicated note(s) by holding down the correct fret button(s) and hitting the strumming bar in order to score points. Success or failure will cause the on-screen Rock Meter to change, gauging the current health of the performance (denoted by red, yellow, and green sections). Should the Rock Meter drop below the red section, the song will automatically end, with the player booed off the stage by the audience. Successful note hits will add to the player's score, and by hitting a long series of consecutive successful note hits, the player can increase their score multiplier. There is a window of time for hitting each note, similar to other rhythm games such as Dance Dance Revolution , but unlike these games, scoring in Guitar Hero is not affected by accuracy; as long as the note is hit within that window, the player receives the same number of points.

Selected special segments of the song will have glowing notes outlined by stars: successfully hitting all notes in this series will fill the "Star Power Meter". The Star Power Meter can also be filled by using the whammy bar during sustained notes within these segments. Once the Star Power Meter is at least half full, the player can activate "Star Power" by pressing the select button or momentarily lifting the guitar into a vertical position. When Star Power is activated, the scoring multiplier is doubled until Star Power is depleted. The Rock Meter also increases more dramatically when Star Power is activated, making it easier for the player to make the Rock Meter stay at a high level. Thus, Star Power can be used strategically to play difficult sections of a song that otherwise might cause the player to fail. In the earlier entries of the series (up until Guitar Hero: Aerosmith ), activating Star Power meant that players could not accrue more Star Power until the Star Power meter was fully drained and the effect ended. Starting with Guitar Hero: World Tour , more Star Power can be collected even if the effect is active by completing more Star Power phrases, extending the Star Power's duration by doing so. When playing in cooperative play (with a bassist/rhythm guitarist in Guitar Hero II through Guitar Hero: Aerosmith or as a band in Guitar Hero: World Tour ), Star Power is shared between all the players and activation of Star Power is dependent on all players simultaneously activating it.

Notes can be a single note, or composed of two to five notes that make a chord . Both single notes and chords can also be sustained, indicated by a colored line following the note marker; the player can hold the sustained note(s) keys down for the entire length for additional points. During a sustained note, a player may use the whammy bar on the guitar to alter the tone of the note. Also, regardless of whether sustains are hit early or late, if the fret is held for the full duration of the hold, the game will always award the same amount of score increase for the note. In addition, the games support virtual implementations of " hammer-ons " and " pull-offs ", guitar-playing techniques that are used to successfully play a fast series of notes by only changing the fingering on the fret buttons without having to strum each note. Sequences where strumming is not required are indicated on-screen by notes with a white outline at the top of the marker instead of the usual black one, with Guitar Hero III: Legends of Rock adding a white-glowing effect to make these notes clearer. Guitar Hero World Tour features transparent notes that are connected by a purple outline; players may either simply tap the correct fret for these notes without strumming or utilize a touchpad on World Tour ' s guitar controller to mimic the slide technique . In addition, notes can now be played while a sustained note is being played. World Tour also adds an open string note for bass players, represented by a line across the fret instead of any note gems, that is played by strumming without holding down any fret buttons (the sixth installment, Warriors of Rock , features an open note sustain for bass instruments as well).

Guitar Hero World Tour introduced drums and vocal tracks in addition to lead and bass guitar.  Drum tracks are played similar to guitar tracks; the player must strike the appropriate drum head or step down on the bass drum pedal on the controller when the note gems pass the indicated line.  Certain note gems, when using a drum controller that is velocity-sensitive, are "armored", requiring the player to hit the indicated drum pad harder to score more points.  Vocal tracks are played similar to games such as Karaoke Revolution where the player must match the pitch and the pacing of the lyrics to score points. Guitar Hero 5 allows players to create a band of up to four players using any combination of instruments.

While the song is playing, the background visuals feature the players' chosen avatar , along with the rest of the band performing in one of several real and fictional venues. The reaction of the audience is based on the performance of the player judged by the Rock Meter. Guitar Hero II added special lighting and other stage effects that were synchronized to the music to provide a more complete concert experience. The games developed by Neversoft feature a simple storyline, usually about a band's quest for fame, which is told through animations played throughout the game. These animations were created by Chris Prynoski and his studio, Titmouse, Inc., who have also done animations for the animated show Metalocalypse .

The main mode of play in the Guitar Hero games is Career Mode, where the player and in-game band travel between various fictional performance arenas and perform sets of four to six songs. It is by completing songs in this mode that the songs are unlocked for play across the rest of the game. Players can choose their on-stage character, their guitar of choice, and the venue in which they wish to play. In this mode, the player can earn money from his/her performances that is redeemable at the in-game store, where bonus songs, additional guitars and finishes, your characters clothing and bonus content can be unlocked. Quick Play mode is a quicker method of playing songs, as it allows the player to select a track and difficulty, selecting the character, venue, and guitar and guitar skin for the player based on the song chosen. After successfully completing a song, the player is given a score, a percentage of how many notes they hit and a rating from three to five stars, and two in rare cases depending on his/her final score on the song, with money being awarded in Guitar Hero World Tour .

The games have also added multiplayer modes.  Cooperative modes allow two players to play lead and either bass or rhythm guitar on the same song, working together towards the same score.  A competitive Face-Off mode allows two players to play against each other at different difficulty levels, each attempting to earn the best score on a song. Each player plays different portions of the song. There is also a Pro Face-Off mode, where two players battle at the same difficulty level. Unlike standard Face-off, each player attempts to play all of the notes in a song, while still trying to earn the highest score. In Guitar Hero World Tour this was advanced on, as players could play a Pro Face-Off game against each other on any difficulty level, the lower your difficulty, the more points were awarded so a player on a low difficulty could potentially beat a player on a more challenging difficulty. Guitar Hero III introduced Boss Battles, in which two players face off against each other, attempt to collect "distractions" to throw at their opponent, trying to make them fail.  With Guitar Hero World Tour , up to four players can play cooperatively on lead and bass guitar, drums, and vocals, while a total of eight players can compete in a Battle of the Bands.  The Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and Wii versions of the games support multiplayer modes over their respective network services.

The four difficulty levels for each song afford the player a learning curve in order to help him/her progress in skill. The first difficulty level, Easy, only focuses on the first three fret buttons while displaying a significantly reduced number of notes for the player to play. Medium introduces the fourth (blue) fret button, and Hard includes the final fret button while adding additional notes. The addition of the orange fret button forces players to move their fingers up and down the neck. Expert does not introduce any other frets to learn, but adds more notes in a manner designed to challenge the player and to simulate the player's hands to move in a sequence similar to a real guitar. A difficulty added in World Tour is Beginner, which only requires the player to strum to the basic rhythm; holding the fret buttons becomes unnecessary. Another new difficulty only for drums was added to Metallica known as Expert+, which uses the double bass pedal.

Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock is the sixth installment in the franchise and introduced a new take on the Career mode of previous games. Rather than being a quest for fame and glory with the band travelling through different venues, Warriors of Rock features the "Quest Mode" as the primary campaign mode. Quest Mode tells the story of an ancient warrior who was defeated by a powerful monster and his mystical guitar was lost. The player must amass a team of rockers to help recover this guitar and defeat the monster (called "The Beast"). As the player progresses through the mode, the rockers joining them will transform based on the number of stars earned from songs played. These transformations will empower the player with extra abilities in a song such as constant score multipliers or Star Power bonuses. These abilities are each unique to the individual rockers and by using them effectively, it is possible now to earn up to forty stars for a single song.

When playing through Career mode or in other parts of the Guitar Hero games, the player has the option to select one of several pre-created avatar characters, who will be shown performing on stage as the player attempts a song, but otherwise has no effect on the gameplay.  A certain number of characters are available at the start of the game, but the player must spend in-game money earned by successful performances to unlock other characters.  Many of the characters reappear throughout the series, with the character roster changing as new characters are added or removed. Standby characters that have appeared in nearly all the games include the metalhead Axel Steel, extreme/Viking/thrash metalhead Lars Ümlaut, punk rocker Johnny Napalm, gothic rocker Pandora, alternative rocker Judy Nails, and hard rocker Casey Lynch. The developers utilized these characters in more detail within Warriors of Rock , where each was given a unique setlist and venue based on their musical style, as well as a unique power within the game's Quest mode.

Several games in the series feature caricatures of celebrity artists, such as Slash , Tom Morello and Bret Michaels in Guitar Hero III , Ozzy Osbourne , Ted Nugent and Jimi Hendrix in World Tour , Kurt Cobain in Guitar Hero 5 , and Taylor Swift and the band No Doubt in Band Hero . The band-specific games, Aerosmith , Metallica , and Van Halen also feature the members of the respective bands. However, in late 2009, both Courtney Love and the members of No Doubt sought legal action against Activision for the misuse of their in-game characters singing or performing songs by other artists, which the musicians believe fell outside of their contract.

The ability for the players to create their own avatars was added in Guitar Hero World Tour , and was based on Neversoft's existing character creation tools from the Tony Hawk series. Later games on the Xbox 360 and Wii allowed players to use the respective console's avatars as members of the band. In addition to unlocking characters, in-game money can be used to buy clothing, accessories and instruments that they are seen playing with.  The guitars can also be customized with special finishes purchasable through the in-game store. Guitar Hero World Tour includes the ability to fully customize any component of the guitar.  The in-game store in the series is also used to unlock bonus songs or special videos with interviews about the game or with the artists involved.

Most of the games in the Guitar Hero series feature a selection of songs ranging from the 1960s to present day rock music from both highly successful artists and bands and independent groups. Guitar Hero Encore: Rocks the 80s features songs primarily from the 1980s, while Guitar Hero: Aerosmith, Metallica, and Van Halen feature music from the respective bands and groups that inspired or worked with the bands. Songs with profanities have been censored.

Many of the Guitar Hero games developed for the recent generation of consoles (Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and Wii) support downloadable content , allowing players to purchase new songs to play in the respective titles.  Songs each cost approximately $ 2 through the various online stores for the console's platform.  Prior to Guitar Hero 5 , downloadable content for earlier games will not work in other games in the series, save for songs from Metallica 's Death Magnetic , which were available for Guitar Hero III , World Tour , and Metallica . Existing World Tour downloadable content for World Tour will be forward-compatible with Guitar Hero 5 , Band Hero and Guitar Hero Warriors of Rock , and for a small fee, some songs from both Guitar Hero World Tour and Guitar Hero Smash Hits can be exported to both Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero , limited by music licensing . Activision has also stated that they are considering a monthly subscription service to deliver downloadable content to user for future games. Guitar Hero World Tour introduced a music creation mode that will allow players to create and share songs (excluding vocals) via the "GHTunes" service, which was also used in all other Guitar Hero games and Band Hero since its inclusion. The creation tools were improved with Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero to allow longer songs and other means of generating songs in real-time.

In the first two games and the 2007 expansion Guitar Hero Encore: Rocks the 80s , the majority of the songs on the main career mode set lists are covers of the original song; for example, a song may be presented as " Free Bird as made famous by Lynyrd Skynyrd ". Guitar Hero III: Legends of Rock introduces a much larger range of original recordings, and World Tour featured a setlist that contained all master recordings .  The covers throughout the games are mostly recreated by WaveGroup Sound who has worked before to create songs for Beatmania , Dance Dance Revolution , and Karaoke Revolution , making small changes to the guitar portions to make them more adaptable for gameplay. Almost all of the unlockable bonus songs are songs performed by the original artist for the game (the only exception is the song " She Bangs the Drums " by The Stone Roses , which is featured in Guitar Hero III: Legends of Rock ).

Prior to the release of Guitar Hero III: Legends of Rock , Activision worked with the iTunes Store to provide more than 1300 tracks of Guitar Hero -related music across more than 20 compilations, including most of the tracks from the games in the series, called " Guitar Hero Essentials ". These compilations, such as " Killer Guitar Solos " and " Guitar Anthems of the ' 80s ", include songs related to but not contained within the Guitar Hero series. Dusty Welch of RedOctane stated, "Where there's music, there's Guitar Hero , and with iTunes, we are able to provide fans with a central location for downloading their favorite rock anthems." Following the merger of Activision and Blizzard, the new company announced plans to create an alternative to iTunes based on the Guitar Hero brand that would allow for downloading songs and their associated note tracks for the Guitar Hero games.

Games in the Guitar Hero series have been generally well received by critics. The initial games were highly praised by reviewers. Neversoft's first entry to the series, Guitar Hero III , was considered to be too difficult, with many difficult songs presenting players with "walls of notes"; the developers later acknowledged this. Subsequent efforts in Guitar Hero: Aerosmith and Guitar Hero World Tour were seen to have some improvements, with Guitar Hero: Metallica considered to be a well-polished title and, at that time, the best Guitar Hero title Neversoft has produced. Guitar Hero 5 ' s improvements toward social gameplay were complemented by reviewers and considered a further improvement upon the series. Entertainment Weekly put it on its end-of-the-decade, "best-of" list, saying, "An addictive videogame provides the illusion of musical mastery for even the least gifted:. How do you get to Carnegie Hall? Tap, tap, tap."

Upon release, the first game was seen as an unexpected hit , earning over US$ 45 million with about 1.5 million copies sold. Guitar Hero II was significantly more financially successful, with over 1.3 million copies sold and sales over US$200 million. Guitar Hero III , according to Activision, was the first single video game to sell more than US$1 billion at retail, with nearly 3.5 million copies sold during the first seven months of 2008. World Tour continued the series' high sales records with 3.4 million units sold in the United States during 2008. More than 60 million downloadable tracks have been purchased across the series as of February 2010. Both Guitar Hero III and World Tour were listed on a March 2011 list from the NPD Group of top-grossing games in unadjusted sales in the United States since 1995; Guitar Hero III tops the list with total sales of $830.9 million.

Overall, the Guitar Hero series has sold more than 25 million units worldwide, earning US$2 billion at retail. Activision claimed the series to be the 3rd largest game franchise in 2009 after the Mario and Madden NFL franchises.

The Guitar Hero series has made a significant cultural impact, becoming a "cultural phenomenon". The series has helped to rekindle music education in children, influenced changes in both the video game and music industry, has found use in health and treatment of recovering patients, and has become part of the popular culture vernacular. Several journalists, including 1UP.com , Wired , G4TV , the San Jose Mercury News , Inc. , The Guardian , and Advertising Age , considered Guitar Hero to be one of the most influential products of the first decade of the 21st century, attributing it as the spark leading to the growth of the rhythm game market, for boosting music sales for both new and old artists, for introducing more social gaming concepts to the video game market, and, in conjunction with the Wii , for improving interactivity with gaming consoles. Guitar Hero has seen a revitalization in the form of a software clone called Clone Hero , as observed in 2020.

Sony's PlayStation 3 console has no compatibility with the PlayStation 2 Guitar Hero controller on the system. While Guitar Hero and Guitar Hero II are fully backward-compatible through the hardware PlayStation 2 emulation in the initial North American release of the console, it was impossible at launch to use the guitar controller to play either game. Kai Huang, of RedOctane, states that they are "working on that with Sony right now – looking at how we can get all the PlayStation 2 guitars that are out there, and all the owners of them, to use them on the PlayStation 3." Nyko , an accessories company, was poised to make a special PlayStation 2 controller adapter for the PlayStation 3, but put the product on hold due to technical difficulties. Tac, another accessories company, also made a PlayStation 2 controller adapter for a PlayStation 3 game console so players could use their Guitar Hero guitar controllers that were made for the PlayStation 2 with a PlayStation 3. However, the May 2007 PlayStation 3 V1.80 system update has made the guitar controller compatible with generic PlayStation 2 controller to USB adapters when playing Guitar Hero and Guitar Hero II . In addition, Pelican Accessories has released a special controller adapter that supports both games, including the ability to switch the handedness of the guitar.

Gibson Guitar Corporation , whose guitar likenesses have appeared in the Guitar Hero series from the first game to Guitar Hero Aerosmith , informed Activision on January 7, 2008, that it believed the games infringe its U.S. patent 5,990,405 . Gibson claimed that this covers technology that simulates a concert performance via pre-recorded audio and a musical instrument. In response, Activision filed a suit seeking a declaration that it was not in violation of the Gibson patent; Activision also asserted that Gibson had given an implied license by waiting to assert the patent and that the patent was invalid. On March 17, 2008, Gibson sued six retailers ( GameStop , Amazon.com , Wal-Mart , Target , Toys "R" Us and Kmart ) for selling Guitar Hero products. Subsequently, on March 21, 2008, Gibson also filed a lawsuit against EA, MTV, and Harmonix over their game Rock Band also for violation of its patent, to which a Harmonix spokesperson stated that Gibson's claims are "completely without merit". Activision lawyer Mary Tuck stated in their legal filings that they believe that Gibson initiated the lawsuit due to the fact that "Activision was not [ interested ] in renewing the License and Marketing Support Agreement" with Gibson Guitars. In February 2009, the United States District Court for the Central District of California ruled against Gibson in their case against Activision, stating that the controllers are not musical instruments but "toys that represent other items", and that Gibson's patent only covers instruments that send out analog signals. Activision and Gibson settled the suit following this ruling.

Activision, through John Devecka, owns all of Devecka Enterprises' US and international patents that deal with music games. All patents issued by the USPTO are presumed valid.

In February 2010, Activision was sued by the Patent Compliance Group (PCG) for releasing Guitar Hero products with false patent claims, with the PCG asserting that games like Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero were marked with up to 10 patents that are not used within the games along with several other improper patent pending claims. PCG claimed that "Acts of false marketing deter innovation and stifle competition in the marketplace." PCG's qui tam lawsuit was seeking up to $500 per unit sold if Activision was found liable. However, by June 2010, PCG had withdrawn the case without prejudice .

Aside from being a defendant, Activision has also acted as a plaintiff. In 2007, the company issued a cease and desist letter to Nicholas Piegdon, the developer of an open source piano teaching program called Piano Hero , demanding he change the name to something less similar to that of the Guitar Hero series. He complied and renamed the software Synthesia .

Many critics believed that the number of releases of Guitar Hero games was "milking" the brand name and oversaturating the market. PaRappa the Rapper creator Masaya Matsuura stated that the video game market was growing stale and needed to move beyond games that simply challenge the player to mimic the playing of licensed music. Ryan Geddes of IGN stated that he "hit the wall with play-along music games", and challenged the game makers to explore other ways to combine music and video games. Analysts stated that such games must continue to innovate instead of just providing more songs in order to prevent "genre fatigue". Jesse Divnich of Electronic Entertainment and Design Research commented that, much like Dance Dance Revolution , Guitar Hero and other music games explosively grew initially due to significant new features from other games but have become stagnant due to focusing on content over features, and suggested that for the genre to continue to grow, they must look to incremental changes as done with the first-person shooter genre. Former CEO for RedOctane, Kelly Sumner, believed that Activision "abused" the series, as "they tried to get too much out of the franchise too quickly".

The series has also been criticized for its release model in contrast to the Rock Band series, causing some players to hold contempt towards Activision. Harmonix considered the Rock Band series as a "music platform", and  supported it with downloadable content and the ability to import songs from its games and expansions into most other games of the series. Critics argued that Guitar Hero should have been doing the same, either through releasing expansions that could be incorporated into the main games of the series, or by issuing the songs as downloadable content. The release of Guitar Hero: Smash Hits , reworking older songs from the series to full four-instrument band support but otherwise adding no additional material, was called "the definition of 'milking'" by reviewers, with no observable technical limitation as to why the songs could not be added as downloadable content. Ars Technica recognized that licensing issues might have limited when songs from one single game could be played in others of the series (such as the case for The Beatles: Rock Band ), but that such cross-compatibility should have been a high priority for rhythm games. Furthermore, some expansions were praised for the additional content beyond the note-matching gameplay; Guitar Hero: Metallica is considered to be one of the series' best works to be developed by Neversoft in part due to the care that the developers took with imaging the band and the available extras for the game. Activision later revealed that both Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero would support playing songs from both Guitar Hero World Tour (both on-disc and downloadable content) and Guitar Hero Smash Hits , with music licensing being the only limiting factor on which songs could be made forward-compatible.

The large number of Guitar Hero and Rock Band titles on the market is considered to be partially responsible for the sharp decline of music game sales in the latter half of 2009, along with the effects of the late-2000s recession . The market for rhythm games was $1.4 billion in 2008, but dropped to $700 million (a 50% decrease) in 2009 even though more titles were available that year. Former Neversoft project director Brian Bright noted that at one point in 2009, they were responsible for the release of three games that year ( Guitar Hero 5 , Metallica , and Band Hero ) and supporting other studios for the development of two additional games, causing the studio to lose focus both in development and marketing efforts. According to Bright, sales of all the Guitar Hero games released in 2009 totaled the number of sales of the 2008 title World Tour , demonstrating the dilution of the marketing. Though Activision had originally planned on tripling the offerings of the Guitar Hero series in 2010, the company readjusted their plans, reducing the number of offerings and focusing more on selling digital downloadable content for the series. Only two titles, Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock and DJ Hero 2 were released in 2010, both scheduled for the "back half of 2010". Analysts predicted that the market would evolve to support a smaller number of titles each year, averaging at a "healthy" value in the range of $500–600 million in revenues annually. Kotick believed that part of the downfall of Guitar Hero was due to Activision's introduction of DJ Hero , which they gave too much focus and left the core Guitar Hero games without the "nourishment and care" needed to continue to innovate in the series.

Activision Publishing chief executive Mike Griffith, in response to questions about Activision's approach to the Guitar Hero market, noted that Guitar Hero continues to outsell the Rock Band series in both number of sales and revenue, with consumers continuing to buy the separate games on the market, and considered the market acceptance of the multiple games as validation for their model. Activision also claimed to have conducted research that showed there was solid consumer interest in products such as DJ Hero and Band Hero , each of which had a markedly different focus than the main installments of the series; series spokesperson Eric Hollreiser suggested the experimental approach would attract players who wanted different styles of music or a different peripheral with which to relate to the music. Regardless, after releasing 25 different SKUs (between games and bundle packages) in 2009, Activision opted to reduce that number to 10 in 2010, recognizing the music game genre was not as profitable as it once was. Activision later opted to suspend future development of the series in early 2011 citing weak sales in the rhythm game genre, a move that many journalists attributed to Activision's earlier oversaturation.